
We introduce DeepProbLog, a neural probabilistic logic programming language that 
incorporates deep learning by means of neural predicates. We show how existing inference 
and learning techniques of the underlying probabilistic logic programming language 
ProbLog can be adapted for the new language. We theoretically and experimentally 
demonstrate that DeepProbLog supports (i) both symbolic and subsymbolic representations 
and inference, (ii) program induction, (iii) probabilistic (logic) programming, and (iv) (deep) 
learning from examples. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst to propose 
a framework where general-purpose neural networks and expressive probabilistic-logical 
modeling and reasoning are integrated in a way that exploits the full expressiveness and 
strengths of both worlds and can be trained end-to-end based on examples.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in AI can be divided into roughly two categories: those that require low-level perception, and those that re-
quire high-level reasoning. At the same time, there is a growing consensus that being capable of tackling both types of tasks 
is essential to achieve true (artiﬁcial) intelligence [2]. Deep learning is empowering a new generation of intelligent systems 
that excel at low-level perception, where it is used to interpret images, text and speech with unprecedented accuracy. The 
success of deep learning has caused a lot of excitement and has also created the impression that deep learning can solve any 
problem in artiﬁcial intelligence. However, there is a growing awareness of the limitations of deep learning: deep learning 
requires large amounts of (the right kind of) data to train the network, it provides neither justiﬁcations nor explanations, 
and the models are black-boxes that can neither be understood nor modiﬁed by domain experts. Although there have been 
attempts to demonstrate reasoning-like behavior with deep learning [3], their current reasoning abilities are nowhere close 
to what is possible with typical high-level reasoning approaches. The two most prominent frameworks for reasoning are 
logic and probability theory. While in the past, these were studied by separate communities in artiﬁcial intelligence, many 
researchers are working towards their integration, and aim at combining probability with logic and statistical learning; cf. 
the areas of statistical relational artiﬁcial intelligence [4,5] and probabilistic logic programming [6].
The abilities of deep learning and statistical relational artiﬁcial intelligence approaches are complementary. While deep 
learning excels at low-level perception, probabilistic logics excel at high-level reasoning. As such, an integration of the two 
would have very promising properties. Recently, a number of researchers have revisited and modernized ideas originating 
from the ﬁeld of neural-symbolic integration [7], searching for ways to combine the best of both worlds [8–10,3], for exam-
ple, by designing neural architectures representing differentiable counterparts of symbolic operations in classical reasoning 
tools. Yet, joining the full ﬂexibility of high-level probabilistic and logical reasoning with the representational power of 
deep neural networks is still an open problem. Elsewhere [11], we have argued that neuro-symbolic integration should: 1) 
integrate neural networks with the two most prominent methods for reasoning, that is, logic and probability, and 2) that 
neuro-symbolic integrated methods should have the pure neural, logical and probabilistic methods as special cases.
With DeepProbLog, we tackle the neuro-symbolic challenge from this perspective. Furthermore, instead of integrating 
reasoning capabilities into a complex neural network architecture, we proceed the other way round. We start from an 
existing probabilistic logic programming language, ProbLog [12], and introduce the smallest extension that allows us to 
integrate neural networks: the neural predicate. The idea is simple: in a probabilistic logic, atomic expressions of the form 
q(t1, ..., tn) (aka tuples in a relational database) have a probability p. We extend this idea by allowing atomic expressions to 
be labeled with neural networks whose outputs can be considered probability distributions. This simple idea is appealing 
as it allows us to retain all the essential components of the ProbLog language: the semantics, the inference mechanism, as 
well as the implementation.
Therefore, one should not only integrate logic with neural networks in neuro-symbolic computation, but also probability.
This effectively leads to an integration of probabilistic logics (hence statistical relational AI) with neural networks and 
opens up new abilities. Furthermore, although at ﬁrst sight, this may appear as a complication, it actually can greatly 
simplify the integration of neural networks with logic. The reason for this is that the probabilistic framework provides a 
clear optimization criterion, namely the probability of the training examples. Real-valued probabilistic quantities are also 
well-suited for gradient-based training procedures, as opposed to discrete logic quantities.
Example 1. Before going into further detail, the following example illustrates the possibilities of this approach. Consider the 
predicate addition(X,Y,Z), where X and Y are images of handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset [13], and Z is the 
natural number corresponding to the sum of these digits. The goal is that after training, DeepProbLog allows us to make a 
probabilistic estimate on the validity of, for example, addition(
 ,
 ,8). While such a predicate can be learned directly 
by a standard neural classiﬁer, such an approach cannot incorporate background knowledge such as the deﬁnition of the 
addition of two natural numbers. In DeepProbLog such knowledge can easily be encoded in rules such as
addition(IX,IY,NZ) :− digit(IX,NX),digit(IY,NY),NZ is NX + NY
with is the standard operator of logic programming to evaluate arithmetic expressions. All that needs to be learned in 
this case is the neural predicate digit which maps an image of a digit ID to the corresponding natural number ND. The 
trained network can then be reused for arbitrary tasks involving digits. Our experiments show that this leads not only to 
new capabilities but also to signiﬁcant performance improvements. An important advantage of this approach compared to 
standard image classiﬁcation settings is that it can be extended to multi-digit numbers without additional training. We note 
that the single digit classiﬁer (i.e., the neural predicate) is not explicitly trained by itself: its output can be considered a 
latent representation, as we only use training data with pairwise sums of digits.
To summarize, we introduce DeepProbLog which has a unique set of features: (i) it is a programming language that sup-
ports neural networks and machine learning and has a well-deﬁned semantics (ii) it integrates logical reasoning with neural 
networks; so both symbolic and subsymbolic representations and inference; (iii) it integrates probabilistic modeling, pro-
gramming and reasoning with neural networks (as DeepProbLog extends the probabilistic programming language ProbLog, 
which can be regarded as a very expressive directed graphical modeling language [4]); (iv) it can be used to learn a wide 
range of probabilistic logical neural models from examples, including inductive programming.
This paper is a signiﬁcantly extended and completed version of our previous work [1]. This extended version now 
contains the necessary deep learning and probabilistic logic programming background and a more in depth theoretical 
explanation. It also contains additional experiments (see Section 6): the MNIST addition experiments from the short version 
are completed with the new experiments T3 and T4, and we designed new experiments (T8 and T9) to further investigate 
the use of DeepProbLog on combined probabilistic learning and deep learning. We have added a new experiment introduc-
ing embeddings that shows that DeepProblog really provides an interface between the neural and the probabilistic logic 
part that is wide and powerful (T10). Finally, we have also added an experiment on the CLUTRR dataset (T11).
The code is available at https://bitbucket .org /problog /deepproblog.
2. Background
2.1. Logic programming concepts
In this section, we brieﬂy summarize basic logic programming concepts; see e.g., Lloyd [14]f o r more details. Atoms are 
expressions of the form q(t1, ..., tn) where q is a predicate (of arity n, or q/n in shorthand notation) and the ti are terms. 
A literal is an atom or the negation ¬q(t1, ..., tn) of an atom. A term t is either a constant c, a variable V, or a structured 
2R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
term of the form f(u1, ..., uk) where f is a functor and the ui are terms. We follow the Prolog convention and let constants, 
functors and predicates start with a lower case character and variables with an upper case. A rule is an expression of the 
form h:– b1, ..., bn where h is an atom, the bi are literals, and all variables are universally quantiﬁed. Informally, the meaning 
of such a rule is that h holds whenever the conjunction of the bi holds. Thus :– represents logical implication (←), and the 
comma (,) represents conjunction (∧). Rules with an empty body n = 0a r e called facts. A logic program is a ﬁnite set of 
rules.
A substitution θ ={ V1 = t1, ..., Vn = tn} is an assignment of terms ti to variables Vi. When applying a substitution θ to 
an expression e we simultaneously replace all occurrences of Vi by ti and denote the resulting expression as eθ. Expressions 
that do not contain any variables are called ground. The Herbrand base of a logic program is the set of ground atoms that 
can be constructed using the predicates, functors and constants occurring in the program.2 Subsets of the Herbrand base 
are called Herbrand interpretations. A Herbrand interpretation is a model of a clause h:–b1, ...,  bn. if for every substitution 
θ such that the conjunction (b1, ...,  bn)θ holds in the interpretation, hθ is in the interpretation. It is a model of a logic 
program if it is a model of all clauses in the program.
For negation-free programs, the semantics is given by the minimal such model, known as the least Herbrand model, 
which is unique. General logic programs use the notion of negation as failure, that is, the negation of an atom is true 
exactly if the atom cannot be derived from the program. These programs are not guaranteed to have a unique minimal 
Herbrand model, and several ways to deﬁne a canonical model have been studied. We follow the well-founded semantics 
here [15].
The main inference task in logic programming is to determine whether a given atom q, also called query (or goal), is 
true in the canonical model of a logic program P, denoted by P |=q. If the answer is yes (or no), we also say that the 
query succeeds (or fails). If such a query is not ground, inference asks for the existence of an answer substitution, that is, a 
substitution that grounds the query into an atom that is part of the canonical model.
2.2. Deep learning
The following paragraphs introduce some key concepts in the ﬁeld of deep learning, needed for understanding the 
training mechanism of DeepProbLog. We however do not provide details on standard architectural building blocks such as 
convolutional or recurrent neural networks which are used in some of the experiments in Section 6; instead, we refer the 
reader to excellent texts such as [16].
An artiﬁcial neural network is a highly parameterized and therefore very ﬂexible non-linear mathematical function that 
can be ‘trained’ towards a particular desired behavior, by suitably adjusting its parameters. During training, the model learns 
to capture from the input data the most informative ‘features’ for the task at hand. The need for ‘feature engineering’ in 
classical (or rather, non-neural) machine learning methods has therefore been replaced by ‘architecture engineering’, since 
a wide variety of neural network components are available to be composed into a suitable model.
Deep neural networks are often designed and trained in an ‘end-to-end’ fashion, whereby only the raw input and the 
ﬁnal target are known during training, and all components of the model are jointly trained. For example, for the task of 
hand-written digit recognition, an input instance consists of a pixel image of a hand-written digit, whereas its target denotes 
the actual digit.
Consider a supervised learning problem, with a training set {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 containing N i.i.d. input instances xi and cor-
responding outputs yi. A model represented by a mapping function M with parameters /Theta1, maps an input item x to the 
corresponding predicted output P(Y|X = x) = M(x|/Theta1).
To quantify how strongly the predicted output P(Y|X = x) deviates from the target output y, a loss function L(P(Y|X =
x), y) is deﬁned. Training the model then comes down to minimizing the expected loss
¯L = 1
N
∑
i
L
(
M(xi|/Theta1), yi
)
over the training set. In the speciﬁc setting of multiclass classiﬁcation, each input instance corresponds to one out of a 
ﬁxed set of M output categories. The target vectors y are typically represented as one-hot vectors: all components are 
zero, except at index m of the corresponding category. The predicted counterpart P(Y|X = x) at the model’s output is often 
obtained by applying a so-called softmax output function to intermediate real-valued scores s obtained at the output of the 
neural network.
The i-th component of the softmax is deﬁned as
softmax(s)i = ˆyi = esi
∑
j esj
The softmax outputs are well-suited to model a probability distribution (i.e., 0 < ˆyi < 1 and ∑
i ˆyi = 1). The standard cor-
responding loss function is the cross-entropy loss, which quantiﬁes the deviation between the empirical output distribution 
ˆy (i.e., the softmax outputs) and the ground truth distribution (i.e., the one-hot target vector y) deﬁned as
2 If the program does not contain constants, one arbitrary constant is added.
3R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
L =−
∑
j
yj log ˆyj
The neural network models we will focus on in this work, are discriminative classiﬁers, which directly model the probability 
distribution P(Y|X = xi) of the target classes, given the input feature representation xi of the i-th example. We will show 
how these can be used to build neural predicates as a probabilistic logic programming component (see Section 3). We 
currently do not consider generative classiﬁcation models. These would also allow modeling the output labels given the 
inputs, by applying Bayes’ law on the prior class probabilities and the inputs distribution given the labels. Yet, we argue 
that taking into account background information such as prior class probabilities is more naturally handled by the reasoning 
component, and that modeling the inputs distribution may be overly complex and is not needed for the purpose of these 
neural predicates.
The most widely used optimization approaches for neural networks are variations of the gradient descent algorithm, in 
which the parameters /Theta1are iteratively updated by taking small steps along the negative gradient of the loss. An estimate 
/Theta1n at iteration n is updated as /Theta1n+1 = /Theta1n − λ∇/Theta1¯L, in which the step size is controlled by the learning rate λ. Typically, 
training is not performed by averaging over the entire dataset per iteration, but instead over a smaller ‘mini-batch’ of 
instances. This is computationally more eﬃcient and allows for a better exploration of parameter space. Importantly, the 
loss gradient can only be calculated if all components of the neural network are differentiable.
A deep neural network typically has a layer-wise architecture: the different layers correspond to nested differentiable 
functions in the overall mapping function M. The ‘forward pass’ through the network corresponds to consecutively applying 
these layer functions to a given input to the network. The intermediate representations obtained by evaluating these layer 
functions are called hidden states. After a forward pass, the gradient with respect to all parameters can then be calculated by 
applying the chain rule. This happens during the so-called ‘backward pass’: the gradients are calculated from the output back 
to the ﬁrst layer. As an illustration of how the chain rule is applied, consider the network function M(x|/Theta1) = g
(
f(x, θf ), θg
)
, 
which contains a ﬁrst layer represented by the vector function f, and a second layer g. For simplicity, say each layer has 
one trainable parameter, respectively written as θf and θg. The derivative with respect to these parameters of a scalar loss 
function applied to the network output, becomes
∇/Theta1L
(
M(x|/Theta1)
)
=
[dL
dθf
, dL
dθg
]
=
[∑
i
∂L
∂gi
∑
j
∂gi
∂ fj
∂ fj
∂θ f
,
∑
i
∂L
∂gi
∂gi
∂θg
]
in which the individual derivatives are evaluated based on the considered input x and current value of the parameters. The 
entire procedure to calculate the gradients is called the backpropagation algorithm. It requires a forward pass to calculate 
all intermediate representations up to the value of the loss. After that, in the backward pass, the gradients corresponding 
to all operations applied during the forward pass, are iteratively calculated, starting at the loss (i.e., with ∂L/∂gi in the 
example). As such, the gradients with respect to parameters at a given layer can be calculated as soon as the gradients due 
to all operations further in the network are known, as governed by the chain rule.
To summarize, a single iteration in the optimization happens as follows: 1) A minibatch is sampled from the training 
data. 2) The output of the neural network is calculated during the forward pass. 3) The loss is calculated based on that 
output and the target. 4) The gradients for the parameters in the neural network are calculated using backpropagation. 5) 
The parameters are updated using a gradient-based optimizer.
3. Introducing DeepProbLog
We now recall the basics of probabilistic logic programming using ProbLog (see De Raedt and Kimmig [6]f o r more 
details), and then introduce our new language DeepProbLog.
3.1. ProbLog
Deﬁnition 1 (ProbLog program). A ProbLog program consists of a set of probabilistic facts F of the form p :: f where p is a 
probability and f an atom, and a set of rules R. /lhd
For instance, the following ProbLog program models a variant of the well-known alarm Bayesian network [17]:
0.1:: burglary.
0.5:: at_home(mary).
0.2:: earthquake.
0.4:: at_home(john).
4R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
alarm:–earthquake.
alarm:–burglary.
calls(X):–alarm, at_home(X).
Each ground instance fθ of a probabilistic fact f corresponds to an independent Boolean random variable that is true with 
probability p and false with probability 1 − p. Let us denote the set of all ground instances of probabilistic facts in F as 
F/Theta1. Every subset F ⊆ F/Theta1deﬁnes a possible world wF = F ∪{ hθ|R ∪ F |=hθ and hθ is ground}, that is, the world wF is 
the canonical model of the logic program obtained by adding F to the set of rules R, e.g.,
w{burglary,at_home(mary)} ={ burglary,at_home(mary)}∪{ alarm,calls(mary)}
To keep the presentation simple, we focus on the case of ﬁnitely many ground probabilistic facts, but note that the semantics 
is also well-deﬁned for the countably inﬁnite case. The probability P(wF) of such a possible world wF is given by the 
product of the probabilities of the truth values of the probabilistic facts:
P(wF) =
∏
fi∈F
pi
∏
fi∈F/Theta1\F
(1− pi) (1)
For instance,
P(w{burglary,at_home(mary)}) = 0.1× 0.5× (1− 0.2) × (1− 0.4) = 0.024
The probability of a ground atom q, also called success probability of q, is then deﬁned as the sum of the probabilities of all 
worlds containing q, i.e.,
P(q) =
∑
F⊆F/Theta1:q∈wF
P(wF) (2)
The probability of a query is also equal to the weighted model count (WMC, see [18]f o r more details) of the worlds where 
this query is true.
For ease of modeling, ProbLog supports non-ground probabilistic facts as a shortcut for introducing a set of ground 
probabilistic facts, as well as annotated disjunctions (ADs), which are expressions of the form
p1 ::h1 ; ... ; pn ::hn :–b1,..., bm.
where the pi are probabilities that sum to at most one, the hi are atoms, and the bj are literals. The meaning of an AD is 
that whenever all bi hold, the AD causes one of the heads hj to be true, or none of them with probability 1 − ∑
pi. Note 
that several of the hi may be true at the same time if they also appear as heads of other rules or ADs. This is convenient to 
model choices between different categorical variables, e.g. different severities of the earthquake:
0.4:: no_earthquake ; 0.4:: mild_earthquake ; 0.2:: severe_earthquake.
or without explicitly representing the event of no earthquake:
0.4:: mild_earthquake ; 0.2:: severe_earthquake.
In which neither mild_earthquake nor severe_earthquake will be true with probability 0.4. Annotated disjunctions 
do not change the expressivity of ProbLog, as they can alternatively be modeled through independent facts and logical rules; 
we refer to De Raedt and Kimmig [6]f o r technical details.
To obtain some intuitions about the probabilistic logic program representation, it is instructive to show how they can 
represent Bayesian networks. Let us show this for Bayesian networks involving Boolean random variables. Each node without 
a parent then corresponds to a probabilistic fact. Observe that both nodes without any parents in a Bayesian network and 
probabilistic facts in ProbLog are marginally independent. Furthermore, each entry in a conditional probability table would 
be mapped onto an annotated disjunction. Assume the parents of the node n are x and y. Then there would be four 
annotated disjunctions of the form pi ::n:–xv, yv, where xv and yv are the positive or negative literals corresponding to x, 
resp. y. This shows that annotated disjunctions can be used to specify conditional probabilities.
3.2. DeepProbLog
In ProbLog, the probabilities of all random choices are explicitly speciﬁed as part of probabilistic facts or annotated 
disjunctions. DeepProbLog extends ProbLog to basic random choices whose probabilities are speciﬁed through external func-
tions implemented as neural networks.
5R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Deﬁnition 2 (Neural annotated disjunction). A neural annotated disjunction (nAD) is an expression of the form
nn(mr,[X1,..., Xk], O,[y1,..., yn])::r(X1,..., Xk, O)
where nn is a reserved functor, mr uniquely identiﬁes a neural network model (i.e., its architecture as well as its trainable 
parameters) that deﬁnes a probability distribution pmr (O|X = x) over the domain O ∈{ y1, ..., yn} given the input x =
[x1, .., xk], X1, ..., Xk are variables representing the inputs to the neural network, O is the output variable, the ground terms 
y1, ..., yn deﬁne the domain of the output distribution, and r is a predicate symbol. Note that the arguments of predicate r
can be in an arbitrary order.
Formally, such a neural AD represents a set of ground neural ADs of the following form, one for every sequence of ground 
terms x1, ..., xk representing inputs to the neural network:
pmr(O = y1|X1 = x1,..., Xk = xk)::r(x1,..., xk, y1) ;
... ;
pmr (O = yn|X1 = x1,..., Xk = xk)::r(x1,..., xk, yn)
The neural network thus represents a discriminative classiﬁer, which naturally maps onto an annotated disjunction for 
each input. For instance, in the MNIST addition example, we would specify the nAD
nn(m_digit,[X],Y,[0,..., 9])::digit(X,Y).
where m_digit is a network that classiﬁes MNIST digits. For input image 
 , the ground nAD is
pm_digit(Y = 0|X =
 )::digit(
 ,0) ; ... ; pm_digit(Y = 9|X =
 )::digit(
 ,9).
The neural network could take any shape, e.g., a convolutional network for image encoding, a recurrent network for 
sequence encoding, etc. However, its output layer, which feeds the corresponding neural predicate, needs to be normalized.
We consider an output domain size of two as a special case. Instead of the neural network having two probabilities 
at the output that sum to one, we can simplify this to a single probability, with the second one the complement of that 
probability. This difference coincides with the difference between a softmax and single-neuron sigmoid layer in a neural 
network. We call such an expression a neural fact.
Deﬁnition 3 (Neural fact). A neural fact is an expression of the form
nn(mr,[X1,..., Xk])::r(X1,..., Xk).
where nn is a reserved functor, mr uniquely identiﬁes a neural network model that deﬁnes a probability distribution 
pmr (O|X = x) over the Boolean domain {1, 0}, given the input x =[ x1, .., xk], X1, ..., Xk are variables representing the inputs 
to the neural network, and r is a predicate symbol. Note that the arguments of predicate r can be in an arbitrary order.
Formally, such a neural fact represents a set of ground neural facts of the following form, one for every sequence of ground 
terms x1, ..., xk representing inputs to the neural network:
pmr(O = 1|X1 = x1,..., Xk = xk)::r(x1,..., xk).
The neural network can be viewed as a discriminative classiﬁer that determines the truth value of the fact.
To exemplify, we use a neural network that gives a measure of the similarity between two input images. We can encode 
this with the following neural fact:
nn(m,[X1,X2])::similar(X1,X2).
For input 
 and 
 , the ground neural fact is
pm(O = 1|X1=
 , X2=
 )::similar(
 ,
 ).
Deﬁnition 4 (DeepProbLog Program). A DeepProbLog program consists of a set of probabilistic facts F, a set of neural facts 
Nf , a set of neural ADs Nad, and a set of rules R. /lhd
The semantics of a DeepProbLog program with respect to a ﬁxed set of possible inputs to every neural network used in 
the neural facts and neural ADs is the semantics of the ProbLog program that replaces each neural fact and neural AD by 
the corresponding sets of ground neural facts and ground neural ADs for these inputs.
It is worth elaborating on the fact that this includes the inputs to the neural networks, such as MNIST images, into the 
Herbrand domain of the program. We discuss two possible ways to view neural inputs and outputs (e.g. MNIST images). 
6R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Both explicitly introduce neural inputs through type predicates, but they differ on how the inputs are represented. For 
instance, we could add MNIST images through the type image:
nn(m,[X1,X2])::similar(X1,X2) :− image(X1),image(X2).
In the ﬁrst view, the image predicate simply introduces one constant per input. This implies, however, that neural inputs, 
just like other constants in the Herbrand domain, are part of the program, and have to be speciﬁed upfront. Furthermore, 
the possible worlds are then, so to speak, conditioned on the possible inputs to the neural networks and the possible worlds 
will only contain these neural inputs and no other ones. This perspective is in line with the discriminative training that we 
propose in Section 5. This excludes the possibility of using neural networks in a generative fashion where “new” images or 
constants could be generated.
In the second view, neural inputs are represented as structured terms that provide an abstract language to deﬁne the 
possible inputs, rather than enumerating them explicitly. For instance, an image is just a matrix of numbers. Under this 
view, the predicate image could simply allow for lists containing exactly 28 × 28 numbers between 0 and 255, which 
would include all possible images in the Herbrand domain. This view would also allow one to represent generative neural 
networks as neural predicates, and would consider possible worlds that contain all possible images. One approach going in 
that direction is that of SPLog [19], which combines DeepProbLog with Sum-Product networks to represent variational and 
probabilistic auto-encoders as neural predicates.
4. Inference
This section explains how a DeepProbLog model is used for a given query at prediction time. First, we provide more 
detail on ProbLog inference [20]. Next, we describe how ProbLog inference is adapted in DeepProbLog.
4.1. ProbLog inference
ProbLog inference proceeds in four steps, the ﬁrst step is the grounding step, in which the logic program is grounded 
with respect to the query. This step uses backward reasoning to determine which ground rules are relevant to derive the 
truth value of the query, and may perform additional logical simpliﬁcations that do not affect the query’s probability.
The second step rewrites the ground logic program into a formula in propositional logic that deﬁnes the truth value of 
the query in terms of the truth values of probabilistic facts. We can calculate the query success probability by performing 
weighted model counting (WMC) on this logic formula (cf. Fierens et al. [20]). However, performing WMC on this logical 
formula directly is not eﬃcient.
The third step is knowledge compilation [21]. During this step, the logic formula is transformed into a form that allows 
for eﬃcient weighted model counting. The current ProbLog system uses Sentential Decision Diagrams (SDDs, Darwiche [22]), 
the most succinct suitable representation available today. SDDs, being a subset of deterministic decomposable negational 
normal forms (d-DNNFs) allow for polytime model counting ([21]). However, they also support polytime conjunction, dis-
junction and negation while being more succinct than OBDDs (Darwiche [22]).
The fourth and ﬁnal step transforms the SDD into an arithmetic circuit (AC). This is done by putting the probabilities 
of the probabilistic facts or their negations on the leaves, replacing the OR nodes with addition and the AND nodes by 
multiplication. The WMC is then calculated with an evaluation of the AC.
Example 2. In Fig. 1, we apply the four steps of ProbLog inference on the earthquake example with query calls(mary).
In the ﬁrst step, the non-ground program (Fig. 1a) is grounded with respect to the query calls(mary). The result is 
shown in Fig. 1b: the irrelevant fact at_home(john) is omitted and the variable X in the calls rule is substituted with 
the constant mary. The resulting formula in the second step is
calls(mary) ↔ at_home(mary) ∧ (burglary ∨ earthquake)
The WMC of this formula is shown in Fig. 1c. However, it is not calculated by enumeration as shown here, but an AC is 
used instead. The AC derived in step four is shown in Fig. 1d, where rounded gray rectangles depict variables corresponding 
to probabilistic facts, and the rounded red rectangle denotes the query atom deﬁned by the formula. The white rectangles 
correspond to logical operators applied to their children. The intermediate results are shown in black next to the nodes in 
Fig. 1d.
4.2. DeepProbLog inference
The only change required for DeepProbLog inference is that we need to instantiate nADs and neural facts to regular ADs 
and probabilistic facts. This is done in two steps. During grounding, we obtain ground nADs and ground neural facts with a 
symbolic representation of the probabilities. In a separate step after grounding, the concrete parameters are determined by 
making a forward pass on the relevant neural network with the ground input.
7R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
0.2::earthquake.
0.1::burglary.
0.5::at_home(mary).
0.4::at_home(john).
alarm :- earthquake.
alarm :- burglary.
calls(X):-alarm,at_home(X).
(a) The ProbLog program.
0.2::earthquake.
0.1::burglary.
0.5::at_home(mary).
alarm :- earthquake.
alarm :- burglary.
calls(mary):-alarm,at_home(mary).
(b) The relevant ground program.
Models of calls(mary) ↔ at_home(mary) ∧ (burglary ∨ earthquake) w
{} 0.36
{at_home(mary)} 0.36
{earthquake} 0.09
{earthquake, at_home(mary),calls(mary)} 0.09
{burglary} 0.04
{burglary, at_home(mary),calls(mary)} 0.04
{burglary, earthquake} 0.01
{burglary, earthquake, at_home(mary),calls(mary)} 0.01
∑
calls(mary)∈model 0.14
(c) The weighted count of the models where calls(mary) is true.
(d) The AC for query calls(mary).
Fig. 1.Inference in ProbLog using query calls(mary) and the program in (a). (Example 2). (For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)
Example 3. We illustrate this by evaluating the MNIST addition example (Fig. 2a). The DeepProbLog program requires two 
lines: the ﬁrst line deﬁning the neural predicate, and the second line deﬁning the addition. We evaluate it on the query 
addition(
 ,
 ,1). In the ﬁrst step, the DeepProbLog program is grounded into a ground DeepProbLog Program (Fig. 2b). 
Note that the nADs are now all ground. As ProbLog only grounds the relevant part of the program, i.e. the part that can 
be used to prove the query, only the digits 0 and 1a r e retained as the larger digits cannot sum to 1. The next step is the 
only difference between ProbLog and DeepProbLog inference: instantiating the ground nADs into regular ground ADs, which 
could, for instance, produce an AD as shown in Fig. 2c. The probabilities in the instantiated ADs do not sum to one, as the 
irrelevant terms (digit(
 ,2), ...,digit(
 ,9) and digit(
 ,2), ..., digit(
 ,9)) have been dropped in the grounding 
process, although the neural network still assigns probability mass to them. Inference then proceeds identically to that of 
ProbLog: the ground program is rewritten into a logical formula, this formula is compiled and transformed into an AC. 
Finally, this AC is evaluated to calculate the query probability.
5. Learning in DeepProbLog
We now introduce our approach to learn the parameters in DeepProbLog programs. The parameters include the learnable 
parameters of the neural network (which we will call neural parameters from now on) and the learnable parameters in the 
logic program (which we will refer to as probabilistic parameters).
ProbLog, just like any other statistical relational AI model such as Markov Logic [4,23], can be trained discriminatively as 
well as a generatively. In the generative setting, the examples are (partial) possible worlds or interpretations, while in the 
discriminative setting they correspond to facts for a speciﬁc target predicate with the evidence residing in the background 
theory. In the present paper, we use the discriminative training setting, which is called learning from entailment [24]i n 
ProbLog.
8R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
nn(m_digit, [X], Y, [0...9]) :: digit(X,Y).
addition(X,Y,Z): - digit(X,N1), digit(Y,N2), Z is N1+N2.
(a) The DeepProbLog program.
nn(m_digit,[
 ],0)::digit(
 ,0);nn(m_digit,[
 ], 1)::digit(
 ,1).
nn(m_digit,[
 ],0)::digit(
 ,0);nn(m_digit,[
 ], 1)::digit(
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - digit(
 ,0), digit(
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - digit(
 ,1), digit(
 ,0).
(b) The ground DeepProbLog program.
0.8: : digit(
 ,0);0 .1: : digit(
 ,1).
0.2: : digit(
 ,0);0 .6: : digit(
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - digit(
 ,0), digit(
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - digit(
 ,1), digit(
 ,0).
(c) The ground ProbLog program.
(d) The AC for query addition(
 ,
 ,1).
Fig. 2.Inference in DeepProbLog (Example3).
Deﬁnition 5 (Learning from entailment). Given a DeepProbLog program with parameters /Theta1, a set Q of tuples (q, X, p) with 
q a query, X the neural input for this query and p its desired success probability, and a loss function L, compute:
argmin
/Theta1
1
|Q|
∑
(q,X ,p)∈Q
L(P(q|X,/Theta1), p)
In most of the experiments, unless mentioned otherwise, we only use positive examples for training (i.e., with desired 
success probability p = 1). The model then needs to adjust the weights to maximize query probabilities P/Theta1(q|X) for all 
training examples. This can be expressed by minimizing the average negative log likelihood of the query, whereby Deﬁni-
tion 5 reduces to:
9R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
argmin
/Theta1
1
|Q|
∑
(q,p)∈Q
−logP/Theta1(q|X)
The presented method however works for other choices in the loss function. For example, in experiment T9 (Section 6.3) 
the mean squared error (MSE) is used.
5.1. Gradient-based learning in ProbLog
In contrast to the earlier approach for ProbLog parameter learning in this setting by Gutmann et al. [25], we use gradient 
based learning instead of EM. This allows for seamless integration with neural network training. The key insight here is 
that we can use the same AC that ProbLog uses for inference for gradient computations as well. This AC is a differentiable 
structure, as it is composed of addition and multiplication operations.
In this work, we rely on the automatic differentiation capabilities already available in ProbLog to derive these gradients. 
More speciﬁcally, to compute the gradient with respect to the probabilistic logic program part, we rely on Algebraic ProbLog 
(aProbLog [26]), a generalization of the ProbLog language and inference to arbitrary commutative semirings, including the 
gradient semiring [27]. Whereas ProbLog is conﬁned to only calculating probabilities, the use of this gradient semiring in 
aProbLog allows the system to calculate the gradient alongside the probabilities. In the following, we provide the necessary 
background on aProbLog, discuss how to use it to compute gradients with respect to ProbLog parameters and extend the 
approach to DeepProbLog.
aProbLog and the gradient semiring ProbLog annotates each probabilistic fact f with the probability p that f is true, which 
implicitly also deﬁnes the probability 1 − p that its negation ¬ f is true. It then uses the probability semiring with reg-
ular addition and multiplication as operators to compute the probability of a query on the AC constructed for this query, 
cf. Fig.1d. The probability semiring is deﬁned as follows:
a⊕ b = a+ b (3)
a⊗ b = ab (4)
e⊕ = 0 (5)
e⊗ = 1 (6)
And the accompanying labeling function as:
L( f) = p for p:: f (7)
L(¬ f) = 1− p with L( f) = p (8)
This idea is generalized in aProbLog to compute such values based on arbitrary commutative semirings. Instead of probability 
labels on facts, aProbLog uses a labeling function that explicitly associates values from the chosen semiring with both facts 
and their negations, and combines these using semiring addition ⊕ and multiplication ⊗ on the AC. We use the gradient 
semiring, whose elements are tuples (p, ∂p
∂θ ), where p is a probability (as in ProbLog), and ∂p
∂θ is the partial derivative of that 
probability with respect to a parameter θ, that is, the probability pi of a probabilistic fact with learnable probability, written 
as t(pi) :: fi. This is easily extended to a vector of parameters ⃗θ =[ θ1, ...,  θN]T , the concatenation of all N probabilistic 
parameters in the ground program, as it is easier and faster to process all gradients in one vector. Semiring addition ⊕, 
multiplication ⊗ and the neutral elements with respect to these operations are deﬁned as follows:
(a1, ⃗a2) ⊕ (b1, ⃗b2) = (a1 + b1, ⃗a2 + ⃗b2) (9)
(a1, ⃗a2) ⊗ (b1, ⃗b2) = (a1b1,b1 ⃗a2 + a1 ⃗b2) (10)
e⊕ = (0, ⃗0) (11)
e⊗ = (1, ⃗0) (12)
Note that the ﬁrst element of the tuple mimics ProbLog’s probability computation, whereas the second simply computes 
gradients of these probabilities using derivative rules.
Gradient-based learning with aProbLog To use the gradient semiring for gradient based parameter learning in ProbLog, we 
ﬁrst transform the ProbLog program into an aProbLog program by extending the label of each probabilistic fact p :: f to 
include the probability p as well as the gradient vector of p with respect to the probabilities of all probabilistic facts and 
ADs in the program, i.e.,
10R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 3.The AC evaluated using the gradient semiring. (Example4).
L( f) = (p, ⃗0) for p:: f with ﬁxedp (13)
L( fi) = (pi,ei) fort(pi):: fi with learnablepi (14)
L(¬ f) = (1− p,−∇p) with L( f) = (p,∇p) (15)
where the vector ei has a 1i n the i-th position and 0i n all others. For ﬁxed probabilities, the gradient does not depend on 
any parameters and thus is 0. Note that after each update step, the probabilistic parameters are clipped to the [0, 1] range, 
and the parameters of an AD are re-normalized to ensure that they sum to one. For the other cases, we use the semiring 
labels as introduced above.
Example 4. Assume we want to learn the probabilities of earthquake and burglary in the example of Fig. 1, while 
keeping those of the other facts ﬁxed. Fig. 3 shows the evaluation of the same AC as in Fig. 1d, but with the gradient 
semiring. The nodes in the AC now also contain the gradient (the second element of the tuple). The result on the top 
node shows that the partial derivative of the query is 0.45 and 0.4w i t h respect to the earthquake and burglary parameters 
respectively.
5.2. Gradient-based learning for DeepProbLog
Just as the only difference between inference in ProbLog and DeepProbLog is the evaluation of the neural facts and 
nADs, the only difference between gradient-based learning in ProbLog and DeepProbLog is optimizing the neural parameters 
alongside the probabilistic parameters. As mentioned in the previous section, the probabilistic parameters pi in the logic 
program can be optimized by using the gradient semiring, which allows us to calculate ∂P(q)/∂pi. This gradient is then 
used to perform the update by using gradient-based learning. Note that since the outputs of the neural networks are used 
as probabilistic facts in the logic program, they are leafs in the AC. Conceptually, it might be easiest to think of the AC 
being connected with the differentiable structure of the neural network at these leaves (cf. Fig. 4c). This creates a single 
differentiable structure in which standard differentiation techniques can be used to derive gradients.
However, in this work, we do not explicitly join the AC and neural networks. Instead, we rely on the aProbLog method as 
described above. This makes the joint learning of probabilistic and neural parameters more straightforward. Note however, 
that the gradients for the internal parameters inside of the neural networks are still derived using backpropagation. The 
outputs of the neural networks can be considered abstract parameters. Although we can derive a gradient for these abstract 
parameters, we cannot optimize them directly, as the logic is unaware of the neural parameters that determine the value 
of these abstract parameters. Recall from Equation (1) that the gradient of the internal (neural) parameters in standard 
supervised learning can be derived using the chain rule in backpropagation. Below, we show how we can derive the gradient 
for these neural parameters of the loss applied to P(q|X) (Deﬁnition 5), rather than a loss function deﬁned directly on the 
output of the neural network.
Speciﬁcally, consider the case of a single neural annotated disjunction, with probabilities ˆpi (i.e., the aforementioned 
abstract parameters), calculated by evaluating a neural network with softmax output. The predicted probability that the 
query holds true, based on the current values of the neural and probabilistic parameters, is written P(q|X). While training, 
true examples should yield a predicted query probability close to the expected query probability, which is expressed by 
means of a loss function L as introduced in Deﬁnition 5.
Application of the chain rule leads to
dL
dθk
= ∂L
∂P(q|X)
∑
i
∂P(q|X)
∂ ˆpi
∂ ˆpi
∂θk
where the derivative of the loss with respect to any trainable parameter θk in the neural network is decomposed into the 
partial derivative of the loss with respect to the predicted output P(q|X), the latter’s derivative ∂P(q|X)/∂ ˆpi with respect 
to each head in the annotated disjunction as obtained with the gradient semiring, and ﬁnally ∂ ˆpi/∂θk, the derivative of 
11R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
nn(classifier,[ X], Y,[ 0 .. 9]) :: digit(X,Y).
t(0.2) :: noisy.
1/19 :: uniform(X,Y,0) ; ... ; 1/19 :: uniform(X,Y,18).
addition(X,Y,Z): - noisy, uniform(X,Y,Z).
addition(X,Y,Z): - \+noisy, digit(X,N1), digit(Y,N2), Z is N1+N2.
(a) The DeepProbLog program.
nn(classifier,[
 ],0)::digit(
 ,0); nn(classifier,[
 ],1)::digit(
 ,1).
nn(classifier,[
 ],0)::digit(
 ,0); nn(classifier,[
 ],1)::digit(
 ,1).
t(0.2)::noisy.
1/19::uniform(
 ,
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - noisy, uniform(
 ,
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - \+noisy, digit(
 ,0), digit(
 ,1).
addition(
 ,
 ,1): - \+noisy, digit(
 ,1), digit(
 ,0).
(b) The ground DeepProbLog program.
(c) The AC for query addition(
 ,
 ,1).
Fig. 4.Parameter learning in DeepProbLog. (Example5).
the neural network’s output components with respect to the considered parameter. The latter is obtained by the standard 
application of the chain rule in the neural network. The backpropagation procedure in the neural network can thus be 
started by providing ∂P(q|X)/∂ ˆpi, to systematically obtain the loss gradients for all neural parameters.
Extending this approach to the situation of multiple neural predicates is straightforward. If the same neural network is 
used for different neural predicates (e.g. in Example 3), the ﬁnal derivative is obtained by summing over the contributions 
of each neural predicate.
Then, standard gradient-based optimizers (e.g. SGD, Adam [28], ...) are used to update the parameters of the network. 
During gradient computation with aProbLog, the probabilities of neural ADs are kept constant. Furthermore, updates on 
neural ADs come from the neural network part of the model, where the use of a softmax output layer ensures a normalized 
distribution, hence not requiring the additional normalization as for non-neural ADs.
12R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 5.The learning pipeline.
To extend the gradient semiring to DeepProbLog programs, we deﬁne it for nADs and neural facts. The label for the nAD 
is deﬁned as:
L( fi) = (ˆpj,e j) fornn(m,[x1,.., xk], yj)::r(x1,.., xk, yj) a ground nAD head (16)
Where yj is the j-th domain element, ˆpj, is the j-th element of the output of the neural network m evaluated on input 
[x1, .., xk]. The label for a neural fact is deﬁned as:
L( fi) = (ˆp,e j) fornn(m,[x1,.., xk])::r(x1,.., xk) a ground neural fact (17)
where ˆp is the output of the neural network m evaluated on input [x1, .., xk]. Since the ﬁrst element of the tuple for nADs 
and neural facts is the evaluation of the neural networks as in Section 4.2, this change remains semantically equivalent.
Example 5. To demonstrate the learning pipeline (Fig. 5), we will apply it on the MNIST addition example show in Sec-
tion 4.2 with a small extension: some of the labels have been corrupted and are picked randomly from a uniform 
distribution over [0, 18]. The goal is to also learn the fraction of noisy examples. The DeepProbLog program is given in 
Fig. 4a. Grounding on the query addition(
 ,
 ,1) results in the ground DeepProbLog program shown in Fig. 4b. The 
arithmetic circuit corresponding to the ground program is shown in Fig. 4c. As can be seen, the neural networks already 
have a conﬁdent prediction for both images (being 0 and 1 respectively). The top right shows how the different partial 
derivatives that are calculated: one with respect to the noisy parameter, ten for the evaluation of the neural network on 
input a and ten for the evaluation on input b.
6. Experimental evaluation
We perform four sets of experiments to demonstrate that DeepProbLog supports (i) logical reasoning and deep learning; 
(ii) program induction; (iii) probabilistic inference and combined probabilistic and deep learning; and (iv) natural language 
reasoning and embeddings.
We provide implementation details at the end of this section and list all programs in Appendix A.
6.1. Logical reasoning and deep learning
To show that DeepProbLog supports both logical reasoning and deep learning, we extend the classic learning task on the 
MNIST dataset [29]t o four more complex problems that require reasoning:
T1: addition(
 ,
 ,8)
Instead of using labeled single digits, we train on pairs of images, labeled with the sum of the individual labels. This is 
the same as Example 3. The DeepProbLog program consists of the clause
addition(X,Y,Z):−digit(X,X2),digit(Y,Y2),Zi sX 2+ Y2
and a neural AD for the digit/2 predicate, which classiﬁes an MNIST image. We compare to a CNN baseline3 classi-
fying the two images into the 19 possible sums.
3 We’d like to thank Paolo Frasconi for the interesting discussion and idea for a new baseline.
13R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 6.MNIST Single-Digit Addition (T1). The graphs show the accuracy on the validation set during training for different training set sizes.
Table 1
The accuracy on the test set for T1.
Model Number of training examples
30 000 3 000 300
Baseline 93 .46± 0.49 78 .32± 2.14 23 .64± 1.75
DeepProbLog 97 .20± 0.45 92 .18± 1.57 67 .19± 25.05
Results Fig. 6 shows the learning curves for the baseline (orange) and DeepProbLog (blue) on the single-digit addition. 
We evaluated on 3 levels of data availability: 30 000 examples, 3 000 and 300 examples. As can be seen in the ﬁgures, 
DeepProbLog converges faster and achieves a higher accuracy than the baseline. In the case for N = 30 000 (Fig. 6a), the 
difference between the baseline and DeepProbLog is signiﬁcant, but not immense. However, for N = 3000 and especially 
N = 300, the difference becomes more apparent.
The reason behind this disparity is that the baseline needs to learn making a decision for the combined input digits 
(and there are a 100 different sums possible), whereas the DeepProbLog’s neural predicate only needs to recognize 
individual digits (with only 10 possibilities). Table 1 shows the average accuracy on the test set for the different models 
for different training set sizes.
T2: addition([
 ,
 ],[
 ,
 ],63)
The input consists of two lists of images, each element being a digit. Each list represents a multi-digit number. The 
label is the sum of the two numbers. The neural predicate remains the same. Learning the new predicate requires only 
a small change in the logic program. Because the CNN baseline cannot handle numbers of varying size, we ﬁxed the 
size of the input to two-digit numbers.
Results First, we perform an experiment where we take the neural network trained in T1 and use it in this model 
without any further training. Evaluating it on the same test set, we achieve an accuracy that is not signiﬁcantly different 
from training on the full dataset of T2. This demonstrates that the approach used in DeepProbLog causes it to generalize 
well beyond training data. Fig. 7 shows the learning curves for the baseline (orange) and DeepProbLog (blue) on the 
multi-digit addition. DeepProbLog achieves a somewhat lower accuracy compared to the single digit problem due to 
the compounding effect of the classiﬁcation error on the individual digits, but the model generalizes well. The baseline 
fails to learn from few examples (150 and 1 500). It is able to learn with 15 000 examples, but converges very slowly. 
Table 2 shows the average accuracy on the test set for the different models for different training set sizes.
T3: addition(
 ,
 ,
 )
The input consists of 3 MNIST images such that the last is the sum of the ﬁrst two. This task demonstrates potential 
pitfalls of only providing supervision on the logic level. Namely, without any regularization, the neural network quickly 
learns to predict 0f o r all digits, i.e., the model collapses to always predicting 0 +0 = 0, as it is a valid logical solution. To 
avoid this, we add a regularization term based on entropy maximization (Equation 18, Section 6.5). The intuition behind 
this regularization term is that it penalizes mode collapse by requiring the entropy of the average output distribution 
per batch to be high. As such, this term encourages exploration, but is only necessary to start the training of the neural 
networks. If they are suﬃciently trained, this term can be dropped. This additional regularization loss is multiplied by 
a factor λ and added to the cross-entropy loss. We run the experiment for different values of λ.
Results Fig. 8 shows the accuracy of the neural predicate on classifying single digits for different levels of the regu-
larization parameter. As can be seen, for λ = 2, the neural predicate converges on the trivial solution. For λ = 4, the 
neural predicate sometimes converges on the correct solution, but can also converge on the wrong solution. For λ = 8, 
the neural network consistently converges on the correct solution.
14R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 7.MNIST Multi-Digit Addition (T2). The graphs show the accuracy on the validation set during training for different training set sizes.
Table 2
The accuracy on the test set for T2.
Model Number of training examples
15 000 1 500 150 T1 (30 000)
Baseline 60 .85± 9.77 1 .34± 0.53 0 .80± 0.14 –
DeepProbLog 95 .16± 1.70 87 .21± 1.92 72 .73± 3.03 93 .36± 1.18
Fig. 8.T h ea c c u r a c yo nt h eM N I S Tt e s ts e tf o ri n d i v i d u a ld i g i t sw h i l et r a i n i n go n(T3).
Table 3
The accuracy on the test set for T4.
Fraction of noisy labels
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Baseline 93 .46 87 .85 82 .49 52 .67 8 .79 5 .87
DeepProbLog 97 .20 95 .78 94 .50 92 .90 46 .42 0 .88
DeepProbLog w/ explicit noise 96 .64 95 .96 95 .58 94 .12 73 .22 2 .92
noisy parameter 0 .000 0 .212 0 .415 0 .618 0 .803 0 .985
T4: addition(
 ,
 ,14)
This experiment is the example shown in Fig. 4. It is the same as T1, but with noise introduced in the labels. Namely, 
a fraction of the labels is replaced by a uniformly selected number between 0 and 18. We compare three models: 
the CNN baseline from T1, the DeepProbLog model from T1, and a DeepProbLog model where the noise is explicitly 
modeled as in Fig. 4. We train with different levels of noise.
Results Table 3 shows the accuracy on the test set which has no noise. The baseline is not tolerant to noisy labels, 
quickly dropping in accuracy as the fraction of noisy labels increases. The DeepProbLog model from T1 is more tolerant, 
but also drops noticeably in accuracy as the fraction of noise goes over 0.5. Explicitly modeling the noise makes the 
model very noise tolerant, even retaining an accuracy of 73.2% with 80% noisy labels. The last row shows the value of 
the learned noisy parameter, stating the estimated likelihood of a noisy label. As shown in the last row of the table, 
15R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
nn(m_{r}esult,[D1,D2,Carry],Y,[0,...,9])::result(D1,D2,Carry,Y).
nn(m_{c}arry,[D1,D2,Carry],Y,[0,1])::carry(D1,D2,Carry,Y).
hole(I1,I2,Carry,NewCarry,Result): -
result(I1,I2,Carry,Result),
carry(I1,I2,Carry,NewCarry).
add([],[],[C],C,[]).
add([H1|T1],[H2|T2],C,Carry,[Digit|Res]): -
add(T1,T2,C,NewCarry,Res),
hole(H1,H2,NewCarry,Carry,Digit).
forth_{a}ddition(L1,L2,C,[Carry|Res]): - add(L1,L2,C,Carry,Res).
Fig. 9.T h ec o d ef o re x p e r i m e n tT5.
Table 4
Accuracy on the addition (T5) problem (results for ∂4r e p o r t e d by Bošnjak 
et al. [8]).
Test length Training length
248
∂4[ 8] 8 100.0 100.0 100.0
64 100.0 100.0 100.0
DeepProbLog 8 100.0 100.0 100.0
64 100.0 100.0 100.0
Table 5
Accuracy
 on the sorting (T6) problem (results for ∂4r e p o r t e d by Bošnjak et al. [8]).
Test length Training length
23456
∂4[ 8] 8 100.0 100.0 49.22 – –
64 100.0 100.0 20.65 – –
DeepProbLog 8 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
64 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
this value is close to the actual fraction of noisy labels. This shows that the model is able to recognize which examples 
have noisy labels.
6.2. Program induction
The second set of problems demonstrates that DeepProbLog can perform program induction. We follow the program 
sketching [30] setting of differentiable Forth (∂4) [8], where holes in given programs need to be ﬁlled by neural networks 
trained on input-output examples for the entire program. As in their work, we consider three tasks: addition, sorting [31]
and word algebra problems (WAPs) [32]. Although T5 and T6 do not involve sub-symbolic inputs, they do show the potential 
of neural networks to learn the behavior needed to ﬁll in holes in the program.
T5: forth_addition([4],[8],1,[1,3])
The input consists of two numbers, represented as lists of digits, and a carry. The output is the sum of the numbers 
and the carry. The program (Fig. 9) speciﬁes the basic addition algorithm in which we go from right to left over all 
digits (add/5), calculating the sum of two digits and taking the carry over to the next pair. The hole in this program 
(hole/5) corresponds to calculating the resulting digit (result/4) and carry (carry/4), given two digits and the 
previous carry.
Results The results are shown in Table 4. Similarly to ∂4, DeepProbLog achieves 100% on all training sizes.
T6: forth_sort([8,2,4],[2,4,8])
The input consists of a list of numbers, and the output is the sorted list. The program implements bubble sort, but 
leaves open what to do on each step in a bubble (i.e. whether to swap or not: swap/2).
Results The results are shown in Table 5. Similarly to ∂4, DeepProbLog achieves 100% on training sizes 2 and 3. How-
ever, whereas ∂4f a i l s to converge on training sizes larger than 3, DeepProbLog stills achieves 100% accuracy. As Bošnjak 
16R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Table 6
Time until 100% accurate on test length 8 for the sorting (T6) problem.
Training length
23 45 6
∂4 on GPU 42 s 160 s – – –
∂4 on CPU 61 s 390 s – – –
DeepProbLog 11 s 14 s 32 s 114 s 245 s
Table 7
The
 fraction of runs that converged to different outcomes for the Coins experiment (T8).
Labeled examples Not solved Expected solution Other solution
0 56% 11% 33%
5 39% 40% 21%
10 7% 92% 1%
20 4% 96% 0%
50 3% 97% 0%
100 4% 96% 0%
et al. [8]m e n t i o n , the failure of ∂4i s due to computational issues arising from the long program trace resulting from 
sorting long lists. DeepProbLog does not suffer from these issues. As shown in Table 6, DeepProbLog runs faster and 
scales better with increasing training length.
T7: wap(‘Robert has 12 books . ... How many does he have now?’,12,3,1,10)
The input to the word algebra problems (WAPs) consists of a natural language sentence describing a simple mathe-
matical problem. These WAPs always contain three numbers, which are extracted from the string and are given as part 
of the input. The output is the solution to the question. Every WAP can be solved by chaining the following 4 steps: 
permuting the three numbers (permute/2), applying an operation on the ﬁrst two numbers (addition, subtraction or 
product operation_1/2), potentially swapping the intermediate result and the last digit (swap/2), and performing 
a last operation (operation_2/2). The hole in the program is in deciding which of the alternatives should happen 
on each step.
Results DeepProbLog reaches an accuracy of up to 96.5%, similar to the results for ∂4r e p o r t e d by Bošnjak et al. [8]
(96%).
6.3. Probabilistic programming and deep learning
In this section we introduce two experiments that show the intricacies involved in combining probabilistic logic pro-
gramming and deep learning.
T8: Coin classiﬁcation and comparison
In this experiment we train two neural networks using distant supervision. The input consists of a synthetic image 
containing two coins (an example is shown in Fig. 10). They are either heads or tails. The image is labeled either with 
same or different. We train a neural network for each coin to predict either heads or tails from the entire image. Solving 
this task requires solving two problems. On the one hand, the neural networks have to learn to recognize and separate 
the two different coins; on the other hand, they also have to each classify a different coin as heads or tails. The ﬁrst 
question we ask is whether the neural networks can recover the latent structure imposed by the logic program. We 
expect the two neural networks to agree on which side of the coin is heads and which is tails, however, this might 
be the inverse of what is generally considered heads and tails. Furthermore, we expect the two neural networks to 
each pick one coin to label, but which network classiﬁes which coin will vary between runs. As such, there are four 
possible solutions that the neural networks can converge on. The second question we ask is how many additionally 
labeled examples (with both the label for same/different and heads/tails of one of the coins given) we need for the 
neural network to recover the desired latent representation.
Results We ran each experiment 100 times. The fraction of runs that converged on either no solution, the expected 
solution or a logically equivalent solution is shown in Table 7. We see that with no additionally labeled examples, 
DeepProbLog does not converge on a satisfactory solution in about half of all runs. When it does converge on a solution, 
it converges on the expected solution 25% of the time, and on different solutions 75% of the time, which is conform with 
our expectations. We can also see that as the number of additionally labeled examples increases, DeepProbLog converges 
more reliably, and more on the expected solution. Starting with 10 additionally labeled examples, DeepProbLog reliably 
converges on the desired solution. Beyond 20 additionally labeled examples, we do not see any further improvements.
T9: 0.8::poker([Q♥, Q♦, A♦, K♣],loss).
17R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 10.A ne x a m p l ei n p u ti m a g ef o rt h eC o i n s(T8) experiment.
Table 8
The results for the Poker experiment (T9).
Distribution Jack Queen King Ace
Actual 0 .20 .40 .15 0 .25
Learned 0 .203± 0.002 0 .396± 0.002 0 .155± 0.003 0 .246± 0.002
In this experiment we demonstrate that DeepProbLog can perform combined probabilistic reasoning, probabilistic learn-
ing and deep learning.
We do this by playing a simpliﬁed poker game: there are two players that are dealt two cards from several decks. There 
is also one community card. Each player then makes a poker hand (e.g. pair, straight, ...) with their two cards and the 
community card. The best combination wins.
The task is to learn to correctly predict the probability that the ﬁrst player wins. To do this, the model also has to learn 
the distribution of the community card, which is not observed and is considered a latent variable. By modeling the task 
with knowledge of its structure, we are able to construct an interpretable model in which the distribution of this latent 
variable is made explicit. This contrasts with a neural model, which, although it might be able to perform the same 
regression, would not provide the user with information of this distribution.
For simplicity, we only use the jack, queen, king and ace. We also do not consider the suits of the cards. The input 
consists of 4 images that show the cards dealt to the two players. Additionally, every example is labeled with the 
chance that the game is won, lost or ended in a draw, e.g.:
0.8 :: poker([Q♥,Q♦,A♦,K♣],loss)
We expect DeepProbLog to:
• train the neural network to recognize the four cards
• reason probabilistically about the non-observed card
• learn the distribution of the non-observed community card
To make DeepProbLog converge more reliably, we add some examples with additional supervision. Namely, in 10% of 
the examples we additionally specify the community card, i.e.
poker([Q♥,Q♦,A♦,K♣],A♦,loss).
This also showcases one of the strengths of DeepProbLog, namely, it can make use of examples that have different levels 
of observability. The loss function used in this experiment is the MSE between the predicted and target probabilities.
Results We ran the experiment 10 times. Out of these 10 runs, 4 did not converge on the correct solution. The average 
values of the learned parameters for the remaining 6 runs are shown in Table 8. As can be seen, DeepProbLog is able 
to correctly learn the probabilistic parameters. In these 6 runs, the neural network also correctly learned to classify all 
card types, achieving a 100% accuracy. The other runs did not converge because some of the classes were permuted 
(i.e., queens predicted as aces and vice versa) or multiple classes mapped onto the same one (queens and kings were 
both predicted as kings).
18R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
similar(I1,I2): -
%Encode images I1 and I2 into E1 and E2
cnn_encode(I1,E1), cnn_encode(I2,E2),
rbf(E1,E2).
(a) Similarity between MNIST images
successor(I1,I2,N): -
%Encode images I1 and I2 into E1 and E2
cnn_encode(I1,E1), cnn_encode(I2,E2),
%Embed the successor relation into embedding S
embed(successor, S),
%The relation should not be trivial (i.e. 0)
\+rbf(S,0).
% E=E 1+N *S should be similar to E2
mul(S,N,S2), add(E1,S2,E),
rbf(E,E2).
(b) The code in the MNIST successor task (T10)
Fig. 11.Embeddings in DeepProbLog.
6.4. Embeddings and natural language reasoning
T10: successor(
 ,
 ,2)
In this experiment, we explore representing embeddings directly in DeepProbLog programs, again using the MNIST 
images as data instances. A straightforward way to obtain image embeddings, is by optimizing a clustering objective. 
That is, we minimize the distance between the embeddings of images of the same number, while maximizing the 
distance between the embedding of images of different numbers. As a similarity metric, the radial basis function 
ϕ(x, y) (RBF) can be used, also used in the neural theorem prover [9], which is deﬁned as
ϕ(x, y) = e−||x−y||2
This can be included in DeepProbLog as a predicate rbf/2 that succeeds with probability p = ϕ(x, y) where x and y
are embeddings that are the arguments of the predicate. The rbf/2 predicate provides DeepProbLog with the power 
of soft uniﬁcation from the Neural Theorem Prover (NTP) [9]. With soft uniﬁcation, literals can be uniﬁed if they 
are similar (e.g. grandPa(abe,bart) can be uniﬁed with grandFather(abe,bart)), which was proven to be 
a powerful concept in Rocktäschel and Riedel [9]. By implementing it explicitly in DeepProbLog, we have additional 
control over the soft uniﬁcation, as we can decide to only apply it to parts of the logic program, whereas in the 
NTP, it is applied to the entire program. For example, here, soft uniﬁcation is only applied to MNIST images, and the 
remainder of the program uses standard reasoning and uniﬁcation.
The corresponding DeepProbLog program is shown in Fig. 11a, in which cnn_encode/2 uniﬁes the second argument 
with the embedding of the ﬁrst argument by using a convolutional neural network, and rbf/2 leads to clustering in 
embedding space.
As a proof of concept of the wider possibilities of implicitly training embeddings through DeepProbLog, we extend the 
clustering objective towards inducing an order relation in embedding space. The successor relationship between two 
MNIST images is deﬁned as successor(I1,I2,R) where I1 and I2 are MNIST images, and R is the difference of 
the digits represented by the two images (e.g. successor(
 ,
 ,−2)).
We model the successor relationship as a translation (cf. TransE [33]). That is, we learn an embedding rs of the suc-
cessor relationship in this embedding space such that we minimize the distance between ex + nrs and ey, where ex
and ey are the embeddings of the two images and n is the difference of the image labels. If n = 0, then the succes-
sor/3 relationship (Fig. 11b) becomes identical to the similarity/2 relationship (Fig. 11a). We also specify that 
rs should not be zero to avoid collapsing on a trivial solution. Note that this constraint on the size of the embedding 
can be seen as a form of regularization deﬁned in the logic. We deﬁne a predicate embed/2 that uniﬁes the second 
argument with a learnable embedding for the ﬁrst argument. Here, rbf/2, cnn_encode/2 and embed/2 are as 
described above, mul/3 is the product between a scalar and a vector and add/3 an element-wise addition. These 
create the mathematical deﬁnition of the successor relationship. The number 0i s used as a zero vector of the same 
dimension as the embeddings.
We generate the dataset for this experiment by labeling each pair of subsequent images in the original MNIST dataset 
with the correct successor label, resulting in 30000 instances for training, and 5000 for testing. Although the embed-
ding dimensionality can be chosen freely, we know that for the successor relation a single dimension should suﬃce. 
For the beneﬁt of visual interpretation, we therefore use an embedding size of 1.
19R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 12.The ﬁnal embedding space for T10 after training the encoder and successor relation embedding. Individual MNIST image embedding are shown in 
crosses, with the mean for each label as a solid dot. The direction of the successor relation is marked by the arrow.
Fig. 13.An example inference task from the CLUTRR dataset.
Result Fig. 12 shows the embeddings of the MNIST test set (crosses) and the mean of each of these images, grouped 
by label (solid dots). It shows that the model has learned to embed images into clusters corresponding to the labels 
of these images, which are positioned sequentially along the embedding dimension. As can be visually inspected, the 
cluster centers can be (approximately) linearly mapped to the actual image labels. This result conﬁrms that, with 
the inclusion of embeddings, DeepProbLog is able to learn structured embedding spaces and perform soft uniﬁcation 
(which can be considered one of the key strengths of the NTP[9]).
T11: Compositional language understanding and reasoning
The ﬁnal experiment further demonstrates DeepProbLog’s ability to manipulate distributed representations (embed-
dings), effectively leading to a wider interface between the neural and logic components. The aim is to illustrate the 
framework’s potential for real-world applications beyond the toy tasks in the previous examples. In particular, this ex-
periment explores to what extent the framework allows reasoning over natural language sentences. For this purpose, 
we will use the Compositional Language Understanding with Text-based Relational Reasoning (CLUTRR) dataset [34].
The CLUTRR dataset consists of short natural language texts of several sentences containing facts about family relations 
between people. The goal is to infer the relation between two people mentioned in the text. These relations are not 
directly mentioned, but have to be inferred from other relations in the text. The task in this experiment is thus to 
train the neural networks to perform relation extraction. That is, we have to extract logical facts from natural language 
sentences, as shown in Fig. 13. In contrast to the original setup of the CLUTRR experiment, we do not solve the 
rule learning aspect. Instead, we follow the idea that is central to DeepProbLog that we can provide the model with 
background knowledge when it is available, and only learn those parts that we cannot deﬁne easily in logic. In this 
case, we provide the family relations shown in Listing 1, and focus on the relation extraction task from the sentences. 
Thus, one can expect good generalization capabilities in the model, if the individual relations are extracted correctly.
Embeddings In this experiment, we further explore the use of embeddings in DeepProbLog. A simpliﬁed version of 
the code can be seen in Listing 2. There are two ways to prove relations between entities: reasoning using background 
knowledge, and extracting relations from the text. The relation extraction happens in the neural_relation/4
predicate. First, we select all relevant sentences for the given entities, that is, the sentences that contain both entities. 
Then we embed these using the embed/3 predicate, which embeds a single sentence (e.g., encodes the sequence of 
tokens into a vector) using a gated recurrent unit encoder (GRU [35], a recurrent architecture similar to the LSTM) on 
top of randomly initialized token embeddings. The ﬁnal state of the GRU for each sentence is used as the embedding. 
Afterwards, the max_tensor/2 predicate performs a max pooling over the sequence of embeddings. The relations 
are predicted through a logistic regression classiﬁer (a single linear layer with a softmax activation function) on top 
of the ﬁnal text representation (nn_rel/2). A diagrammatic overview is given in Fig. 14. A similar process happens 
for the neural_gender/3 predicate that predicts the gender for a single entity. The beneﬁt of being able to ma-
nipulate embeddings inside of the logic itself is that the neural model itself becomes simpler and the logic becomes 
20R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Fig. 14.The implementation of the neural predicate for relation extraction, illustrated on the relation between Alice and Bob.
more expressive. This shows that DeepProbLog is more than a simple pipeline where logical reasoning follows neural 
network evaluation. Instead, DeepProbLog is an interface between the logic and neural sides.
The model as it is currently shown relies on the fact that all rules are present. However, if this were not the case, we 
could replace the gaps in the knowledge by a neural counterpart (i.e., a neural component that tries to directly predict 
the missing relation directly from the entire text).
Experiments The ﬁrst experiment on the CLUTRR dataset investigates the innate ability of DeepProbLog to generalize. 
There are several facts that connect the two query entities. The number of facts needed to connect the two will be 
called k (e.g. in the example in Fig. 13, k = 2). In particular, we show how the model generalizes to longer texts and 
an increasing number of reasoning steps than seen during training. To do this, it is trained for smaller k (e.g. k < 4) 
and evaluated on larger k (e.g. k < 10). The model is trained until no further improvements occur for two consecutive 
steps on the accuracy on a held-out set with k = 2. We hypothesize that the neural network mainly needs to learn to 
recognize elementary relations, whereas the logic component will tackle the reasoning required to deal with larger k
values.
The second experiment investigates the robustness of the reasoning component. To test this, the CLUTRR dataset adds 
unnecessary sentences and facts to the text. These include supporting facts, irrelevant facts and disconnected facts. 
Supporting facts are facts that provide an alternate explanation for (part of) the relation between the two query 
entities. Irrelevant facts are facts that mention relevant entities, but cannot be used to explain the query relation. 
Disconnected facts are about entities and relations that are not related at all to the query or other entities. In this 
experiment, we train on clean data (k = 2, 3) and test how well it performs on the other data (k = 3). We also see 
what the impact of training on the supporting, irrelevant or disconnected data has on the accuracy. We trained until 
we saw no further improvement for 2 steps on the accuracy on the test set for k = 2.
grandchild(X,Y): - child(X,Z), child(Z,Y).
grandchild(X,Y): - so(X,Z), grandchild(Z,Y).
grandchild(X,Y): - grandchild(X,Z), sibling(Z,Y).
grandparent(X,Y): - parent(X,Z), parent(Z,Y).
grandparent(X,Y): - sibling(X,Z), grandparent(Z,Y).
child(X,Y): - child(X,Z), sibling(Z,Y).
child(X,Y): - so(X,Z), child(Z,Y).
parent(X,Y): - sibling(X,Z), parent(Z,Y).
parent(X,Y): - child(X,Z), grandparent(Z,Y).
sibling(X,Y): - child(X,Z), uncle(Z,Y).
sibling(X,Y): - parent(X,Z), child(Z,Y).
sibling(X,Y): - sibling(X,Z), sibling(Z,Y).
child_in_law(X,Y): - child(X,Z),so(Z,Y).
parent_in_law(X,Y): - so(X,Z), parent(Z,Y).
nephew(X,Y): - sibling(X,Z), child(Z,Y).
uncle(X,Y): - parent(X,Z), sibling(Z,Y).
Listing 1: The background knowledge used in T11.
Results Fig. 15 shows the result for the systematic generalization experiment. The DeepProbLog model shows strong 
generalization capabilities for all three training datasets. This is in contrast with the results as shown in Sinha 
et al. [34], where most methods have a steady decline in accuracy beyond the dataset. This result shows the ben-
eﬁt of performing logical reasoning with background knowledge. If the relation extraction is correct, DeepProbLog has 
no problem generalizing to larger values of k.
Table 9 shows the result for the robust reasoning experiment. It shows that the DeepProbLog model is indeed robust. 
This is in line with its observed generalization capabilities. As long as the individual relations are predicted correctly, 
the reasoning is also correct.
21R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Table 9
Robust reasoning on the CLUTRR task for different types of noise.
Training Testing Accuracy
Clean Clean 1 .0
Supporting 0 .99
Irrelevant 0 .98
Disconnected 0 .99
Supporting Supporting 1 .0
Irrelevant Irrelevant 1 .0
Disconnected Disconnected 0 .94
Fig. 15. Systematic generalization on the CLUTRR task for different training sets. It shows the accuracy (y-axis) with respect to the number of relations 
needed to discover the query relation (x-axis).
6.5. Implementation details
For the implementation we integrate ProbLog2 [36]w i t h PyTorch [37]. All programs are listed in Appendix A. In all 
experiments except T9, we optimize the cross-entropy loss between the predicted and target query probabilities, as we 
found that this works better to learn the probabilistic parameters. In experiment T9 we optimize the MSE between the 
predicted and target query probabilities as this proved to converge more reliably. This setting was previously used in Gut-
mann et al. [25]. We use Adam [28] optimization for the neural networks, and SGD for the logic parameters. For T9, we add 
random rotations (max 10 degrees) and shift the colors in the HSV by up to 5% to the images of the cards.
In T11 we use negative mining by proving the query for all possible relations and using the correct label as a positive 
example and all other labels as negative examples. This prevents the model to predict incorrect labels for irrelevant facts. We 
did not include the templates the authors collected using Amazon Mechanical Turk and have generated the same datasets 
as in the original paper, using the code provided by the authors.
The neural network architectures are summarized in Table 13. Conv(o,k) denotes a convolutional layer with o output 
channels and kernel size k. Lin(n) denotes a fully connected layer of size n. (Bi)GRU(h) denotes a single-layer (bi-directional) 
GRU with a hidden size h. (layer)×2 means that there are two identical layers in parallel that are concatenated. A layer in 
bold means it is followed by a ReLU activation function. All neural networks end with a Softmax layer, unless otherwise 
speciﬁed. The hyperparameters used in the experiments are shown in Table 11. The sizes of the datasets used are speciﬁed 
in Table 12.
The regularization term used in T3 is calculated per network and per batch on the average of the neural network output. 
It is calculated as
1.0− Hn
(
1
N
n∑
i=1
Pi
)
(18)
where Pi is the i-th output of the neural network and Hn is the n-ary entropy (i.e. entropy using the base-n logarithm).
22R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
%Neural network that predicts relation for the given embedding
nn(net1,[E],R,[child,child_in_law,...]) :: nn_rel(E,R).
%Neural network that predicts the gender for a given embedding
nn(net2,[E],G,[male,female]) :: nn_gender(E,G).
%Predicate that proves the relation R between X and Y
query_rel(T,X,R,Y):-
%Determine the gender G for entity Y in text T
neural_gender(T,Y,G),
%Turn the gendered relation R into the un-gendered relation R2
gender_rel(R2,G,R),
%Prove relation R2 between entities X and Y
call(R2,T,X,Y).
%Predicate that predicts the gender G for entity E
neural_gender(T,E,G): -
%E is an entity mentioned in the text T
entity(T,E),
%Only include relevant sentences (i.e. E is mentioned)
include(mentioned(E), T, Relevant),
%Map each relevant sentence onto its embedding
maplist(embed([E]),Mentioned,Embedded),
%Take the element-wise max of all embeddings
max_tensor(Embedded,Max),
%Classify the resulting embedding
nn_gender(Max,G).
%Predicate that predicts the relation R between entities X and Y
neural_relation(T,X,R,Y): -
%X and Y are entities mentioned in the text T
entity(Sentences,X),
entity(Sentences,Y),
X \={Y},
%Only include relevant sentences (i.e. X and Y are mentioned)
include((mentioned(X),mentioned(Y)),Sentences,Mentioned),
%Map each relevant sentence onto its embedding
maplist(embed([Y,X]),Mentioned,Embedded),
%Take the element-wise max of all embeddings
max_tensor(Embedded,Max),
%Classify the resulting embedding
nn_rel(Max,R).
child(T,X,Y): - neural(T
,X,child,Y).
child_in_law(T,X,Y): - neural(T,X,child_in_law,Y).
...
grandchild(T,X,Y): - X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z), child(T,Z,Y).
grandchild(T,X,Y): - X\={Y}, so(T,X,Z), grandchild(T,Z,Y).
grandchild(T,X,Y): - X\={Y}, grandchild(T,X,Z), sibling(T,Z,Y).
grandparent(T,X,Y): - X\={Y}, parent(T,X,Z), parent(T,Z,Y).
grandparent(T,X,Y): - X\={Y}, sibling(T,X,Z), grandparent(T,Z,Y).
...
Listing 2: Part of the code for the CLUTRR experiment (T11).
6.6. Computation time
Due to the nature of the exact inference used in DeepProbLog, which it inherits from aProbLog [26], the grounding and 
compilation steps can become expensive as the problem size grows. Table 10 shows the mean time and standard deviation 
for the different steps in inference for the MNIST addition task for numbers of increasing length. As we can see, the time 
spent on grounding increases steeply and quickly becomes the dominant factor.
It is important to note that when we evaluate an example a second time, the structure of the AC, which is determined by 
the grounding and compilation, remains the same. Only the learned probabilities in the nAD change. We make use of this 
to improve the performance by caching the arithmetic circuits so that we only have to perform the (potentially expensive) 
grounding and compilation steps once. During evaluation, we only re-evaluate the neural networks and evaluate the AC 
with the updated probabilities.
Note that this optimization can also be applied to, for example, the queries addition(
 ,
 ,8) and addition(
 , 
 ,
8), as both have the same structure. To do this, we introduce placeholder constants and change both queries to the single 
23R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Table 10
Mean and standard deviation of the duration in seconds of different inference steps 
for 100 queries of the MNIST addition example for increasing number lengths (k).
Number length Grounding (s) Compilation (s) Evaluation (s)
10 .018± 0.00 0 .004± 0.00 0 .017± 0.01
21 .39± 0.25 0 .035± 0.02 0 .158± 0.07
3 114 ± 5.23 0 .140± 0.04 0 .567± 0.08
Table 11
Overview
 of the hyperparameters used in the experiments.
Task Batch size Learning rate Parameter learning rate Regularization
T1-T3 21 e - 3
T4 2 1e-3 1e-3 2, 4, 8
T5 50 0.02
T6 16 1.0
T7 100 0.005
T8 51 e - 4 0 . 2 5
T9 50 1e-4 1e-3 0.5
T10 41 e - 3
T11 21 e - 3
Table 12
Overview of the sizes of the datasets used in the experiments.
Task Training set Validation Set Test set
T1 29 500, 3 000, 300 500 5 000
T2 14750, 1 500, 150 250 2 500
T3 16 000 2 000 3 000
T4 29 500 500 5 000
T5 512 256 1 024
T6 256 32 32
T7 300 100 200
T8 100 – 20
T9 500 – 25
T10 30 000 – 500
T11 1000 – 50
query addition(a,b,8), which reduces all queries in T1 to 19 unique queries, one for each different label. During the 
evaluation of the neural networks, we replace the constants with the correct input and use the resulting probabilities in the 
cached ACs. We apply these optimizations to all experiments.
7. Related work
The integration of logical reasoning and neural networks is a ﬁeld with a long tradition that currently enjoys a lot of 
interest. Most of the work on combining neural networks and logical reasoning comes from the neuro-symbolic reasoning
literature [7,38]. These approaches typically focus on approximating logical reasoning with neural networks by encoding 
logical terms in Euclidean space. However, these approaches have to limit their expressivity to non-recursive and acyclic 
logic programs [39] and do neither support probabilistic reasoning nor perception.
The renewed interest in neuro-symbolic systems has introduced many new perspectives that make the individual ap-
proaches diﬃcult to compare. The remainder of this section provides an overview of the main ideas present in the ﬁeld. 
Before we do that, we identify four dimensions that distinguish DeepProbLog from other systems. Moreover, we argue that 
these dimensions are important for understanding the capabilities and limitations of neuro-symbolic systems in general. 
These dimensions (Table 14) are:
1. Logical, neural and probabilistic components. DeepProbLog has a probabilistic, a logical, and a neural component, 
whereas most other methods only have two. Though this may appear as a complication, our work shows that it 
greatly simpliﬁes the integration of neural networks with logic. The probabilistic framework provides the semantics 
of DeepProbLog programs. It also provides a clear optimization criterion, namely the probability of the training ex-
ample. Real-valued probabilistic quantities are also well-suited for gradient-based training procedures, as opposed to 
discrete logic quantities.
24R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Table 13
Overview of the neural network architectures used in the experiments.
Task Network Architecture
T1-T4 digit/2 MNISTConv, Lin(120), Lin(84),L i n ( 1 0 )
T1,T3 baseline MNISTConv ×2, Lin(120), Lin(84), Lin(19)
T2 baseline (MNISTConv ×2, Lin(100))×2,Lin(128), Lin(199)
T5 result/4 Lin(50), TanH, Lin(10)
carry/4 Lin(10), TanH, Lin(2)
T6 swap/3 Lin(20),L i n ( 1 0 )
T7 RNN Embedding(256), BiGRU(512), Dropout(0.5)*
perm/2 Lin(6)
op1/2 Lin(4)
swap/2 Lin(2)
op2/2 Lin(4)
T8 coin1/2 AlexNetConv, Lin(100), Lin(2)
coin2/2 AlexNetConv, Lin(100),L i n ( 2 )
T9 rank/2 AlexNetConv, Lin(100),L i n ( 4 )
T10 embed/2 Embed(2)
cnn_embed/2 MNISTConv, Lin(120), Lin(84),L i n ( 2 ) *
T11 embed/2 Embed(16), GRU(16)
nn_rel/2 Lin(11)
nn_gender/2 Lin(2)
MNISTConv: Conv(6,5), MP(2,2), Conv(16,5), MP(2,2)* AlexNetConv: Conv(64, 11, 2,2), 
MP(3,2), Conv(192, 5, 2), MP(3,2), Conv(384, 3, 1), Conv(256, 3, 1), Conv(256, 3, 1), MP(3,2)*
* Does not end with a Softmax layer.
Table 14
An overview of related work across the four discussed concepts.
Method Components
(P)robabilistic
(L)ogic
(N)eural
Special cases
(L)ogic
(N)eural
Semantics
(P)robabilistic
(F)uzzy
(O)thers
Origin
(L)ogic
(N)eural
[41] L + N - F -
FSL[42] L + N - O -
ASR [43] L + N - O -
SBR[44] L + N - F -
LTN[45] L + N - F N
SL[46] P+L+N N P L
NTP [9] L+N - O L+N
NLProlog[47] L+N - O L+N
TensorLog[10] L+N L O L
NMN[48] N - - -
δ4[ 8] N (L+)N O -
δILP[49] L+N L O L
LRNN[50] L+N - F
RelNN[51] L+P L P L
2. Logic and neural networks as special cases. DeepProbLog has both logic and neural networks as special cases. In our 
opinion, further elaborated in [40], the integration should preserve the original concepts it integrates. If not, some of 
the power of the original methods is lost in the integration.
3. Semantics. DeepProbLog has well deﬁned semantics. This is important as this allows us to specify exactly what is 
calculated by the DeepProbLog framework and can be given a probabilistic interpretation. This is missing from many 
other works where soft scores are used instead, which do not have a clear, semantical meaning.
4. Logical or neural origin of a system. DeepProbLog originated from probabilistic logic programming technology rather 
than neural network technology. Due to its origins, DeepProbLog offers three beneﬁts: (i) DeepProbLog does neither 
sacriﬁce the expressivity of logic nor neural networks; (ii) DeepProbLog incorporates probabilistic inference ’for free’, 
alongside logical reasoning and neural predictions; (iii) DeepProbLog is a Turing-complete programming language.
The three most prominent neuro-symbolic research lines are (1) pushing the logic as regularization, (2) templating neural 
networks, and (3) neural program induction. Before we outline these prominent lines, we cover the two approaches that 
relate the most to DeepProbLog: grounding-speciﬁc MLNs [52] and Deep Probabilistic Logic [53].
25R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
7.1. The most comparable approaches
Grounding-speciﬁc MLNs [52]e x t e n d Markov logic networks (MLN) [54], another popular StarAI framework, so that the 
weight of a formula can differ for different groundings of the formula. The weights can be determined by neural models, 
similar to how neural networks in DeepProbLog deﬁne probabilities. In contrast to ProbLog, which assigns probabilities to 
facts, MLNs represent uncertain knowledge with tuples of weighted formulas, {(wi, Fi)}. In standard MLNs, every grounding 
of a formula Fi has the same associated weight wi; in grounding-speciﬁc MLNs, the weight can change depending on the 
constants present in the grounding.
Deep Probabilistic Logic (DPL) [53]i s a general framework for indirect supervision of deep learning models: it treats the 
predictions of deep models as latent variables that probabilistic logic models operate on, imposing the indirect supervision 
in terms of (soft) constraints. DeepProbLog is a more general framework, as the same setting that is shown in DPL, namely 
that of distant supervision of neural networks, is used here in most experiments. However, as we have shown in T10 and
T11, DeepProbLog has a wider interface that allows for bi-directional ﬂow of information (i.e, the neural networks can 
inﬂuence the logic.
7.2. Logic as regularization
The main idea behind this line of research is to include the logic as a regularizer of the neural network, during the optimiza-
tion or the learning of the embeddings. This formalism encodes the logic into the weights of the network, so that even 
when the logic is not explicitly present, the model still follows the characteristics of the logic. [41–46]a l l center around 
including logical background knowledge as a regularizer during training. Rocktäschel et al. [41]i n j e c t background knowledge 
into a matrix factorization model for relation extraction, by adding differentiable loss terms for propositionalized ﬁrst-order 
rules. Demeester et al. [42]p r o p o s e a more eﬃcient alternative by inducing order relations in embedding space, effectively 
leading to a lifted application of the rules. This is further generalized by Minervini et al. [43], who investigate injecting rules 
by minimizing an inconsistency loss on adversarially-generated examples. Diligenti et al. [44]u s e ﬁrst-order logic to specify 
constraints on the output of the neural network. They use fuzzy logic to create a differentiable way of measuring how much 
the output of the neural networks violates these constraints. This term is then added as an additional loss term that acts as 
a regularizer. More recent work by Xu et al. [46]i n t r o d u c e s a similar method that uses probabilistic logic instead of fuzzy 
logic, and is thus more similar to DeepProbLog. They also compile the formulas to an SDD for eﬃciency.
The major difference between DeepProbLog and these regularization approaches is that DeepProbLog maintains explicit 
logical knowledge. In the other approaches, the explicit logical knowledge is lost in the regularization approaches as it 
is included as a penalty during training and not considered during prediction. Another major difference is in the logic 
employed by the systems: DeepProbLog is based on probabilistic logic programming, whereas the regularization methods 
rely on (fuzzy) ﬁrst-order logic. This is reminiscent to the difference between ProbLog and Markov Logic [54]o r PSL [55]. 
DeepProbLog can be used on a wider variety of tasks than these systems. Because it is also a programming language, it 
well suited to work with structured data, or data of varying length. For example, in the multi-digit addition example T2, 
DeepProbLog can deal with the varying input sizes naturally, while most neural methods cannot cope with this.
7.3. Templating neural networks
The second line of work uses logic as a template for constructing the architecture of neural networks. This is reminiscent 
of the knowledge base model construction approaches of statistical relational artiﬁcial intelligence [4].
Rocktäschel and Riedel [9]i n t r o d u c e a differentiable framework for theorem proving. They re-implement Prolog’s theo-
rem proving procedure (with bounded proof depth) in a differentiable manner and enhance it with learning a subsymbolic 
representation of the existing symbols, which are used to handle noise in data. Whereas Rocktäschel and Riedel use logic 
only to construct a neural network and focus on learning subsymbolic representations, DeepProbLog focuses on tight inter-
actions between the two and parameter learning for both the neural and the logic components. In this way, DeepProbLog 
retains the best abilities of both worlds. Recently, Weber et al. [47]e x t e n d the notion of soft uniﬁcation towards struc-
tured textual knowledge, i.e., uniﬁcation can be performed between sentences, not only symbols. In contrast to Rocktäschel 
and Riedel [9], Weber et al. [47]r e t a i n the full ability of logical reasoning, and as such is closer to DeepProbLog, but it is 
specialized for NLP tasks.
Cohen et al. [10]i n t r o d u c e a framework to compile a tractable subset of logic programs into differentiable functions and 
to execute it with neural networks. It provides an alternative probabilistic logic but it has a different and less developed 
semantics. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge it has not been applied to the kind of tasks tackled in the present 
paper. An idea similar in spirit to ours is that of Andreas et al. [48], who introduce a neural network for visual question 
answering composed out of smaller modules responsible for individual tasks, such as object detection. Whereas the compo-
sition of modules is determined by the linguistic structure of the questions, DeepProbLog uses probabilistic logic programs 
to connect the neural networks.
7.4. Neural program induction
The third line of work focuses on learning programs from data by combining neural and symbolic approaches.
26R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
Neural execution The ﬁrst category captures a program behavior with neural networks and therefore focuses on program 
execution. This includes the works such as ∂4b y Bošnjak et al. [8], in which neural networks are used to ﬁll in holes in a 
partially deﬁned Forth program, and ∂ILP by Evans and Grefenstette [49], in which neural networks learn a program by se-
lecting a subset of clauses to form the ﬁnal program. In contrast to ∂4 which uses a procedural host language, DeepProbLog 
uses ProbLog, and consequently Prolog, which results in native support for both logical and probabilistic reasoning. ∂ILP
focuses on program induction with neural networks and not on the integration of the two approaches like DeepProbLog.
Neurally guided search The second category includes the work on incorporating the neural components in search procedures 
for the symbolic program induction techniques. As these methods are not logic-based, the comparison made in Table 14 is 
not relevant, and is therefore omitted. The key principle these techniques employ is to perform the search over programs 
in a systematic symbolic way, but guide the search with a heuristic learned by a deep neural network. For instance, Kalyan 
et al. [56]t r a i n a neural network to predict the scores of branches during the branch-and-bound search procedure, Zhang 
et al. [57]t r a i n a neural network to choose which candidate program to expand next while exploiting the constraints 
on the input-output examples, while Ellis et al. [58]u s e a neural network to eﬃciently search over a well-designed DSL. 
DeepProbLog currently supports only program induction by sketching and, thus, none of these approaches are directly 
comparable to it.
Neural program construction The ﬁnal category involves techniques that decompose a problem into independent parts that 
can be individually solved by either neural or symbolic components and synchronize the individual components to solve 
the main problem. For instance, Yi et al. [59], Mao et al. [60]p r o p o s e a neuro-symbolic approach towards visual question 
answering by using a neural network to generate a program computing the answer to the question and executing the 
program symbolically. Ellis et al. [61] generate LATEX code from a hand-drawn sketch by using a neural network to recognize 
basic shapes within a sketch and symbolically inducing the program describing the sketch.
These approaches are close in spirit to DeepProbLog as they retain both the neural and the symbolic component ex-
plicitly; however they focus on their synchronization in which one components provides the input for the other, while 
DeepProbLog tightly integrates them so that both components inter-operate.
7.5. Symbolic deep learning
The success of neural deep learning has inspired several works introducing symbolic deep learning methods which, in-
stead of representing the logical aspects in a vector space, retain the logical data representation in the latent representation. 
These include the symbolic versions of deep neural networks: Šourek et al. [50]t r e a t symbolic rules expressed in ﬁrst-order 
logic as a template for constructing a neural network, while Kazemi and Poole [51] compose a relational neural network 
by adding hidden layers to relational logistic regression [62]. Another research direction focuses on task-agnostic discov-
ery of relational (symbolic) latent representations by exploiting approximate symmetries [63], a symbolic extension of the 
auto-encoding principle [64], or self-play [65].
8. Limitations and future work
One of the current limitations is that DeepProbLog currently only supports exact probabilistic inference. As a conse-
quence, several steps in the inference can become prohibitively expensive as the size of the program grows. This issue is 
however not intrinsic to the proposed integration, but can be resolved in future work by extending DeepProbLog with ap-
proximate inference. This is similar to standard work in StarAI, where approximate inference is needed to scale up. There 
has already been research into approximate inference in ProbLog [66,67] which could be adapted to the work presented 
here.
In the comparison with other methods, we discussed some features that were available in DeepProbLog that are not in 
other methods, and vice versa. One feature that stands out is the ability to use and explicitly manipulate embeddings and 
tensors [45,42,41]. Although we have shown preliminary result of the applicability of embeddings in experiments T10-T11, 
future work could look into this more extensively.
Another feature that is present in other methods is structure learning. Although we have shown some results in this 
(T5-T7), we have currently only explored the sketching approach. There are however other approaches that are worth 
investigating, such as inductive logic programming.
Finally, a problem that DeepProbLog faces is the problem where the desired interpretation of the learned facts does 
not overlap with what is actually learned. For example, in T3, DeepProbLog learns the trivial solution 0 + 0 = 0, which, 
although logically correct, is not a desired solution. This was solved by using additional regularization. In T8 we investigate 
whether the desired interpretation (i.e., that the coins get correctly classiﬁed as heads and tails) can be reliably achieved 
using additional supervision. Ideally, we would like to develop a more principled approach to solving these issues.
9. Conclusion
We introduced DeepProbLog, a framework where neural networks and probabilistic logic programming are integrated in 
a way that exploits the full expressiveness and strengths of both worlds and can be trained end-to-end based on examples. 
27R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
This was accomplished by extending an existing probabilistic logic programming language, ProbLog, with neural predicates. 
Learning is performed by using aProbLog to calculate the gradient of the loss which is then used in standard gradient 
based methods to optimize parameters in both the probabilistic logic program and the neural networks. We evaluated 
our framework on experiments that demonstrate its capabilities in combined symbolic and subsymbolic reasoning, program 
induction, probabilistic logic programming, embeddings and natural language processing. We showed that with the inclusion 
of logic, DeepProbLog models can outperform neural networks in accuracy, data eﬃciency, robustness and generalization. 
We also showed that embeddings can be used directly in DeepProbLog, which illustrates the power of the interface that 
DeepProbLog provides.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by the Research Foundation - Flanders (1S61718N, 12ZE520N), and the European Re-
search Council Advanced Grant project SYNTH (ERC AdG-694980). It has also received funding from the Flemish Government 
under the “Onderzoeksprogramma Artiﬁciële Intelligentie (AI) Vlaanderen” programme.
Appendix A. DeepProbLog programs
nn(m_digit,[X],Y,[0,...,9]) :: digit(X,Y).
addition(X,Y,Z): - digit(X,X2), digit(Y,Y2), Z is X2+Y2.
Listing 3: Single-digit MNIST addition (T1).
In Listing 3, digit/2 is the neural predicate that classiﬁes an MNIST image into the integers 0 to 9. The addition/3
predicate’s ﬁrst two arguments are MNIST digits, and the last is the sum. It classiﬁes both images using digit/2 and 
calculates the sum of the two results.
nn(m_digit,[X],Y,[0,...,9]) :: digit(X,Y).
number([],Result,Result).
number([H|T],Acc,Result): -
digit(H,Nr),
Acc2 is Nr+10*Acc,
number(T,Acc2,Result).
number(X,Y): - number(X,0,Y).
multi_addition(X,Y,Z): - number(X,X2), number(Y,Y2), Z is X2+Y2.
Listing 4: Multi-digit MNIST addition (T2).
In Listing 4, the only difference with Listing 3 is that the multi_addition/3 predicate now uses the number/2
predicate instead of the digit/2 predicate. The number/3 predicate’s ﬁrst argument is a list of MNIST images. It uses the
digit/2 neural predicate on each image in the list, summing and multiplying by ten to calculate the number represented 
by the list of images (e.g. number([
 ,
 ],38)).
nn(m_digit,[X],Y,[0,...,9]) :: digit(X,Y).
addition(X,Y,Z): - digit(X,X2), digit(Y,Y2), digit(Z,Z2), Z2 is X2+Y2.
Listing 5: All-digit MNIST addition (T3).
In Listing 5, the only difference with Listing 3 is that all 3 inputs X,Y,Z are images. As such, the digit/2 predicate is 
also used on the third input. The sum is also redeﬁned as Z2 is X2+Y2.
In Listing 6, an additional probabilistic fact (noisy/2) is added that encodes the chance of an example being noisy. The
addition/3 predicate is split into two cases: when the noisy is true or when noisy is false. The latter is the same as in 
Listing 3. If noisy is true, Z is considered to be drawn from the uniform distribution (uniform/3).
28R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
nn(classifier,[ X], Y,[ 0 .. 9]) :: digit(X,Y).
t(0.2) :: noisy.
1/19 :: uniform(X,Y,0) ; ... ; 1/19 :: uniform(X,Y,18).
addition(X,Y,Z): - noisy, uniform(X,Y,Z).
addition(X,Y,Z): - \+noisy, digit(X,N1), digit(Y,N2), Z is N1+N2.
Listing 6: Noisy MNIST addition (T4).
nn(m_result,[D1,D2,Carry],Y,[0,...,9])::result(D1,D2,Carry,Y).
nn(m_carry,[D1,D2,Carry],Y,[0,1])::carry(D1,D2,Carry,Y).
hole(I1,I2,Carry,NewCarry,Result): -
result(I1,I2,Carry,Result),
carry(I1,I2,Carry,NewCarry).
add([],[],[C],C,[]).
add([H1|T1],[H2|T2],C,Carry,[Digit|Res]) :-
add(T1,T2,C,NewCarry,Res),
hole(H1,H2,NewCarry,Carry,Digit).
forth_addition(L1,L2,C,[Carry|Res]) :- add(L1,L2,C,Carry,Res).
Listing 7: Forth addition sketch (T5).
In Listing 7, there are two neural predicates: result/4 and carry/4. These are used in the hole/4 predicate that 
corresponds to the hole in the Forth program. The ﬁrst three arguments are the two digits and the previous carry to be 
summed. The next two arguments are the new carry and the new resulting digit. The add/5 predicate’s arguments are: 
the two list of input digits, the input carry, the resulting carry and the resulting sum. It recursively calls itself to loop over 
both lists, calling the hole/5 predicate on each position, using the carry from the previous step.
nn(m_swap,[ X]) :: swap(X,Y,).
hole(X,Y,X,Y):-\+swap(X,Y).
hole(X,Y,Y,X):-swap(X,Y).
bubble([X],[],X).
bubble([H1,H2|T],[X1|T1],X):-
hole(H1,H2,X1,X2),
bubble([X2|T],T1,X).
bubblesort([],L,L).
bubblesort(L,L3,Sorted): -
bubble(L,L2,X),
bubblesort(L2,[X|L3],Sorted).
forth_sort(L,L2): - bubblesort(L,[],L2).
Listing 8: Forth sorting sketch (T6).
In Listing 8, there’s a single neural predicate: swap/3. Its ﬁrst two arguments are the numbers that are compared, the 
last argument is an indicator whether to swap or not. The bubble/3 predicate performs a single step of bubble sort on its 
ﬁrst argument using the hole/4 predicate. The second argument is the resulting list after the bubble step, but without its 
last element, which is the third argument. The bubblesort/3 predicate uses the bubble/3 predicate, and recursively 
calls itself on the remaining list, adding the last element on each step to the front of the sorted list.
In Listing 9, there are four neural predicates: net1/2 to net4/2. Their ﬁrst argument is the input question, and 
the second argument are indicator variables for the choice of respectively: one of six permutations, one of 4 operations, 
swapping and one of 4 operations. These are implemented in the permute/7, swap/5 and operator/4 predicates. The
wap/5 predicate then sequences these steps to calculate the result.
29R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
permute(0,A,B,C,A,B,C).
permute(1,A,B,C,A,C,B).
permute(2,A,B,C,B,A,C).
permute(3,A,B,C,B,C,A).
permute(4,A,B,C,C,A,B).
permute(5,A,B,C,C,B,A).
swap(0,X,Y,X,Y).
swap(1,X,Y,Y,X).
operator(0,X,Y,Z): - Z is X+Y.
operator(1,X,Y,Z): - Z is X-Y.
operator(2,X,Y,Z): - Z is X*Y.
operator(3,X,Y,Z): - Y >0 , 0 =:= X mod Y,Z is X//Y.
nn(m_net1,[Repr],Y,[0,...,5])::net1(Repr,Y).
nn(m_net2,[Repr],Y,[0,...,3])::net2(Repr,Y).
nn(m_net3,[Repr],Y,[0,1])::net3(Repr,Y).
nn(m_net4,[Repr],Y,[0,...,3])::net4(Repr,Y).
wap(Text,X1,X2,X3,Out): -
net1(Text,Perm),
permute(Perm,X1,X2,X3,N1,N2,N3),
net2(Text,Op1),
operator(Op1,N1,N2,Res1),
net3(Text,Swap),
swap(Swap,Res1,N3,X,Y),
net4(Text,Op2),
operator(Op2,X,Y,Out).
Listing 9: Forth WAP sketch (T7).
nn(net1,[ X], Y,[ heads, tails]) :: coin1(X,Y).
nn(net2,[ X], Y,[ heads, tails]) :: coin2(X,Y).
compare(X,X,same).
compare(X,Y,different): - \+compare(X,Y,same).
coins(X,Comparison): -
coin1(X,C1),
coin2(X,C2),
compare(C1,C2,Comparison).
Listing 10: The coins experiment (T8).
Fig. A.16.Examples of cards used as input for the Poker without perturbations(T9) experiment.
In Listing 10, there are two neural predicates: coin1/2 and coin2/2. Their input is the image of the two coins (e.g. 
Fig. 10). The output is heads or tails. The coins/2 classiﬁes both coins using these two predicates and then performs the 
comparison of the classes with the compare/3 predicate.
In Listing 11, there’s a single neural predicate rank/2 that takes as input the image of a card (examples are shown 
in Figure A.16) and classiﬁes it as either a jack, queen, king or ace. There’s also an AD with learnable parameters that 
represents the distribution of the unseen community card (house_rank/1). The hand/2 predicate’s ﬁrst argument is a 
list of 3 cards. It uniﬁes the output with any of the valid hands that these cards contain. The valid hands are: high card, 
pair (two cards have the same rank), three of a kind (three cards have the same rank), low straight (jack, queen king) and 
30R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
t(1/4)::house_rank(jack);t(1/4)::house_rank(queen);
t(1/4)::house_rank(king);t(1/4)::house_rank(ace).
nn(net1,[X],Y,[jack,queen,king,ace]):: rank(X,Y).
hand(Cards,straight(low)) :-
member(card(jack),Cards),
member(card(queen),Cards),
member(card(king),Cards).
hand(Cards,straight(high)) :-
member(card(queen),Cards),
member(card(king),Cards),
member(card(ace),Cards).
hand([card(R), card(R), card(R)],threeofakind(R)).
hand(Cards,pair(R)) :-
select(card(R),Cards,Cards2),
member(card(R),Cards2).
hand(Cards,high(R)) :-
member(card(R),Cards).
hand_rank(high(jack),0).
...
hand_rank(straight(high),13).
best_hand_rank(Cards
,R): -
hand(Cards,H),
hand_rank(H,R),
\+(hand(Cards,H2),hand_rank(H2,R2),R2>R).
outcome(R1,R2,win): - R1 > R2.
outcome(R1,R2,loss): - R1 < R2.
outcome(R,R,draw).
cards(C1,C2,House,[card(R1), card(R2), House]) :-
rank(C1,R1),
rank(C2,R2).
game([C1,C2,C3,C4],House,Outcome): -
cards(C1,C2,House,Hand1),
cards(C3,C4,House,Hand2),
best_hand_rank(C1,R1),
best_hand_rank(C2,R2),
outcome(R1,R2,Outcome).
game(Cards,Outcome): -
house_rank(House),
game(Cards,House,Outcome).
Listing 11: The Poker experiment (T9).
high straight(queen, king, ace). Each hand is assigned a rank with the hand_rank/2 predicate. The best_hand_rank/2
predicate takes as input a list of cards, and uniﬁes the second argument with the highest hand rank that is possible with the 
three given cards. The outcome/3 predicate determines the outcome by comparing the two ranks of the best hand. The
game/3 predicate’s ﬁrst argument is a list of the 4 input images. Its second input is the labeled community card. It classiﬁes 
the cards using the neural predicates, determines the best rank, and then uniﬁes the last argument with the outcome. The
game/2 determines the community card from the learned distribution house_rank/1, and then determines the outcome 
using the game/3 predicate. The member/2 and select/3 predicates are predicates from the lists library. member/2 is 
true if its second argument is a list and the ﬁrst argument appears in that list. select/3 is true if its second argument is 
a list and the ﬁrst argument appears in that list. It also uniﬁes the last argument with the list that is the same as its second 
argument, but with the ﬁrst argument removed.
In Listing 13, the main predicate is the query_rel(T,X,R,Y) predicate that will predict the relationship R that 
holds between entities X and Y in text T. To simplify reasoning, all relations are reduced to a non-gendered version (e.g., 
signiﬁcant other instead of husband). The gender_rel/3 predicate provides information about all the possible relations, 
and ties the gendered version to its non-gendered version (e.g., gender_rel(child,female,daughter). The gender 
is determined separately using the neural_gender/3 predicate.
After this, a meta-call happens to try to prove the actual relation using the call predicate. There are two ways to prove 
the relations: either directly using the neural predicates, or through the logic that encodes the family relations. Also note 
that we explicitly encode the depth D when proving recursively to avoid cycles. Although DeepProbLog can deal with cycles, 
this was done to improve performance. Note also that we pre-process the text by splitting it into individual sentences, 
31R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
successor(I1,I2,N): -
%Encode images I1 and I2 into E1 and E2
cnn_encode(I1,E1), cnn_encode(I2,E2),
%Embed the successor relation into embedding S
embed(successor, S),
% E=E 1+N *S
mul(S,N,S2), add(E1,S2,E),
rbf(E,E2).
Listing 12: The MNIST successor task (T10).
:-use_module(library(apply)).
nn(net1,[T],R,[child,child_in_law,...]) :: nn_rel(T,R).
nn(net2,[T],G,[male,female]) :: nn_gender(T,G).
query_rel(T,X,R,Y):-gender_rel(R2,G,R),neural_gender(T,Y,G),call(R2,T,X,Y,3).
mentioned(X,s(E,_)) :- member(X,E).
neural_gender([Entities|Sentences], E, G): -
member(E,Entities),
include(mentioned(E), Sentences,[ H|Sentences2]),
maplist(embed([E]),[H|Sentences2],Embedded),
max_tensor(Embedded,Max),
nn_gender(Max,G).
neural([Entities|Sentences], X,R,Y): -
member(X,Entities), member(Y,Entities), X \== Y,
include(mentioned(X),Sentences,Sentences2),
include(mentioned(Y),Sentences2,[H|Sentences3]),
maplist(embed([Y,X]),[H|Sentences3],Embedded),
max_tensor(Embedded,Max),
nn_rel(Max,R).
child(T,X,Y,_): - neural(T,X,child,Y).
child_in_law(T,X,Y,_): - neural(T,X,child_in_law,Y).
grandchild(T,X,Y,_): - neural(T,X,grandchild,Y).
...
grandchild(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z,D-1), child(T,Z,Y,D-1).
grandchild(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, so(T,X,Z,D-1), grandchild(T,Z,Y,D-1).
grandchild(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, grandchild(T,X,Z,D-1), sibling(T,Z,Y,D-1).
grandparent(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, parent(T,X,Z,D-1), parent(T,Z,Y,D-1).
grandparent(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, sibling(T,X,Z,D-1), grandparent(T,Z,Y,D-1).
child(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z,D-1), sibling(T,Z,Y,D-1).
child(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, so(T,X,Z,D-1), child(T,Z,Y,D-1).
parent(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, sibling(T,X,Z,D-1), parent(T,Z,Y,D-1).
parent(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z,D-1), grandparent(T,Z,Y,D-1).
sibling(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z,D-1), uncle(T,Z,Y,D-1).
sibling(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, parent(T,X,Z,D-1), child(T,Z,Y,D-1).
sibling(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, sibling(T,X,Z,D-1), sibling(T,Z,Y,D-1).
child_in_law(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, child(T,X,Z,D-1),so(T,Z,Y,D-1).
parent_in_law(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, so(T,X,Z,D-1), parent(T,Z,Y,D-1).
nephew(T,X,Y,D): -D>0,X\={Y}, sibling(T,X,Z,D-1), child(T,Z,Y,D-1).
uncle(T,X,Y,D): - D>0,X\={Y}, parent(T,X,Z,D-1), sibling(T,Z,Y,D-1)
gender_rel(child,male,son).
gender_rel(child,female,daughter).
gender_rel(parent,male,father).
gender_rel(parent,female,mother).
...
Listing 13: The CLUTRR experiment (T11).
replacing the entity names with numbers, and keeping track which entities are mentioned in each sentence. Although this 
could be done inside of the logic, we did this in a separate step to keep the logic more readable. In the neural/4 predicate, 
we ﬁrst ﬁlter out any sentences that do not mention the relevant entities we want to know the relation for. This is done 
using the include/3 predicate. We then map every sentence onto its embedding by using the maplist/3 predicate 
32R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
to loop over the list and the embed/3 predicate to map the given sentence. The ﬁrst argument is a list of entities that 
determine how the entities should be encoded. The ﬁrst entity in this list will be encoded with the token ENT1, the second 
with ENT2, ... Any other entity will be tokenized as ENT. We take the element-wise max of all these embeddings using the
max_tensor/2 predicate. Then the actual prediction is made using the nn_rel/2 neural predicate.
References
[1] R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, A. Kimmig, T. Demeester, L. De Raedt, Deepproblog: neural probabilistic logic programming, in: Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 3749–3759.
[2] D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus and Giroux New York, 2011.
[3] A. Santoro, D. Raposo, D.G. Barrett, M. Malinowski, R. Pascanu, P. Battaglia, T. Lillicrap, A simple neural network module for relational reasoning, in: 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017, pp. 4974–4983.
[4] L. De Raedt, K. Kersting, S. Natarajan, D. Poole, Statistical relational artiﬁcial intelligence: logic, probability, and computation, Synth. Lect. Artif. Intell. 
Mach. Learn. 10 (2016) 1–189.
[5] L. Getoor, B. Taskar, Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning, MIT Press, 2007.
[6] L. De Raedt, A. Kimmig, Probabilistic (logic) programming concepts, Mach. Learn. 100 (2015) 5–47.
[7] A.S.d. Garcez, K.B. Broda, D.M. Gabbay, Neural-Symbolic Learning Systems: Foundations and Applications, Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[8] M. Bošnjak, T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, Programming with a differentiable forth interpreter, in: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on 
Machine Learning, vol. 70, 2017, pp. 547–556.
[9] T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, End-to-end differentiable proving, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017, pp. 3788–3800.
[10] W.W. Cohen, F. Yang, K.R. Mazaitis, Tensorlog: deep learning meets probabilistic databases, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 1 (2018) 1–15.
[11] L. De Raedt, R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, T. Demeester, A. Kimmig, Neuro-symbolic= neural+ logical+ probabilistic, in: NeSy’19@ IJCAI, the 14th Interna-
tional Workshop on Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[12] L. De Raedt, A. Kimmig, H. Toivonen, ProbLog: a probabilistic prolog and its application in link discovery, in: IJCAI, 2007, pp. 2462–2467.
[13] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haffner, Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition, Proc. IEEE 86 (1998) 2278–2324.
[14] J.W. Lloyd, Foundations of Logic Programming, 2. ed., Springer, 1989.
[15] A. Van Gelder, K.A. Ross, J.S. Schlipf, The well-founded semantics for general logic programs, J. ACM 38 (1991) 620–650.
[16] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2016, http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[17] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1988.
[18] A. Kimmig, G. Van den Broeck, L. De Raedt, Algebraic model counting, J. Appl. Log. 22 (2017) 46–62.
[19] A. Skryagin, K. Stelzner, A. Molina, F. Ventola, Z. Yu, K. Kersting, Sum-product logic: integrating probabilistic circuits into deepproblog, in: Working 
Notes of the ICML 2020 Workshop on Bridge Between Perception and Reasoning: Graph Neural Networks and Beyond, 2020.
[20] D. Fierens, G. Van den Broeck, J. Renkens, D. Shterionov, B. Gutmann, I. Thon, G. Janssens, L. De Raedt, Inference and learning in probabilistic logic 
programs using weighted Boolean formulas, Theory Pract. Log. Program. 15 (2015) 358–401.
[21] A. Darwiche, P. Marquis, A knowledge compilation map, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 17 (2002) 229–264.
[22] A. Darwiche, SDD: a new canonical representation of propositional knowledge bases, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Joint Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-11, 2011, pp. 819–826.
[23] P. Domingos, D. Lowd, Markov logic: an interface layer for artiﬁcial intelligence, Synth. Lect. Artif. Intell. Mach. Learn. 3 (2009) 1–155.
[24] M. Frazier, L. Pitt, Learning from entailment: an application to propositional horn sentences, in: Machine Learning, Proceedings of the Tenth Interna-
tional Conference, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA, June 27-29, 1993, 1993, pp. 120–127.
[25] B. Gutmann, A. Kimmig, K. Kersting, L. De Raedt, Parameter learning in probabilistic databases: a least squares approach, in: Joint European Conference 
on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, 2008, pp. 473–488.
[26] A. Kimmig, G. Van den Broeck, L. De Raedt, An algebraic Prolog for reasoning about possible worlds, in: AAAI, 2011.
[27] J. Eisner, Parameter estimation for probabilistic ﬁnite-state transducers, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002, pp. 1–8.
[28] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: a method for stochastic optimization, in: Y. Bengio, Y. LeCun (Eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, 
Conference Track Proceedings, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, 2015, http://arxiv.org /abs /1412 .6980.
[29] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haffner, Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998, pp. 2278–2324.
[30] A. Solar-Lezama, Program sketching, Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 15 (2013) 475–495.
[31] S. Reed, N. de Freitas, Neural programmer-interpreters, in: International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2016.
[32] S. Roy, D. Roth, Solving general arithmetic word problems, in: Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, 2015, pp. 1743–1752.
[33] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, O. Yakhnenko, Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data, in: Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
[34] K. Sinha, S. Sodhani, J. Dong, J. Pineau, W.L. Hamilton, Clutrr: a diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from text, in: Empirical Methods of 
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2019.
[35] K. Cho, B. Van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, Y. Bengio, Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder 
for statistical machine translation, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1406 .1078, 2014.
[36] A. Dries, A. Kimmig, W. Meert, J. Renkens, G. Van den Broeck, J. Vlasselaer, L. De Raedt, Problog2: probabilistic logic programming, in: Joint European 
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, 2015, pp. 312–315.
[37] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin, A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, A. Lerer, Automatic differentiation in pytorch, in: 
Proceedings of the Workshop on the Future of Gradient-Based Machine Learning Software and Techniques, Co-Located with the 31st Annual Conference 
on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS 2017, 2017.
[38] B. Hammer, P. Hitzler, Perspectives of Neural-Symbolic Integration, vol. 8, Springer, Heidelberg, 2007.
[39] S. Hölldobler, Y. Kalinke, H.-P. Störr, Approximating the semantics of logic programs by recurrent neural networks, Appl. Intell. 11 (1999) 45–58.
[40] L. De Raedt, R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, T. Demeester, A. Kimmig, Neuro-symbolic = neural + logical + probabilistic, in: NeSy’19@ IJCAI, the 14th 
International Workshop on Neural-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning, 2019.
[41] T. Rocktäschel, S. Singh, S. Riedel, Injecting logical background knowledge into embeddings for relation extraction, in: NAACL HLT 2015, the 2015 
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2015, pp. 1119–1129.
[42] T. Demeester, T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, Lifted rule injection for relation embeddings, in: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, 2016, pp. 1389–1399.
[43] P. Minervini, T. Demeester, T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, Adversarial sets for regularised neural link predictors, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on 
Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAI, 2017.
33R. Manhaeve, S. Dumanˇci´c, A. Kimmig et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 298 (2021) 103504
[44] M. Diligenti, M. Gori, C. Sacca, Semantic-based regularization for learning and inference, Artif. Intell. 244 (2017) 143–165.
[45] I. Donadello, L. Seraﬁni, A.S. d’Avila Garcez, Logic tensor networks for semantic image interpretation, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International 
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2017, Melbourne, Australia, August 19-25, 2017, 2017, pp. 1596–1602.
[46] J. Xu, Z. Zhang, T. Friedman, Y. Liang, G.V. den Broeck, A semantic loss function for deep learning with symbolic knowledge, in: Proceedings of the 
35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, 2018, pp. 5498–5507.
[47] L. Weber, P. Minervini, J. Münchmeyer, U. Leser, T. Rocktäschel, Nlprolog: reasoning with weak uniﬁcation for question answering in natural language, 
in: Proceedings of ACL 2018, Tutorial Abstracts, 2019.
[48] J. Andreas, M. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, D. Klein, Neural module networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2016, pp. 39–48.
[49] R. Evans, E. Grefenstette, Learning explanatory rules from noisy data, J. Artif. Intell. Res. 61 (2018) 1–64.
[50] G. Šourek, V. Aschenbrenner, F. Železný, S. Schockaert, O. Kuželka, Lifted relational neural networks: eﬃcient learning of latent relational structures, J. 
Artif. Intell. Res. 62 (2018).
[51] S.M. Kazemi, D. Poole, RelNN: a deep neural model for relational learning, in: AAAI, 2018.
[52] M. Lippi, P. Frasconi, Prediction of protein β-residue contacts by Markov logic networks with grounding-speciﬁc weights, Bioinformatics 25 (2009) 
2326–2333.
[53] H. Wang, H. Poon, Deep probabilistic logic: a unifying framework for indirect supervision, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods 
in Natural Language Processing, Brussels, Belgium, October 31 -N o v e m b e r 4, 2018, 2018, pp. 1891–1902.
[54] M. Richardson, P. Domingos, Markov logic networks, Mach. Learn. 62 (2006) 107–136.
[55] S.H. Bach, M. Broecheler, B. Huang, L. Getoor, Hinge-loss Markov random ﬁelds and probabilistic soft logic, arXiv preprint, arXiv:1505 .04406, 2015.
[56] A. Kalyan, A. Mohta, O. Polozov, D. Batra, P. Jain, S. Gulwani, Neural-guided deductive search for real-time program synthesis from examples, in: ICLR, 
2018.
[57] L. Zhang, G. Rosenblatt, E. Fetaya, R. Liao, W.E. Byrd, M. Might, R. Urtasun, R. Zemel, Neural guided constraint logic programming for program synthesis, 
in: NeurIPS, 2018.
[58] K. Ellis, L. Morales, M. Sablé-Meyer, A. Solar-Lezama, J. Tenenbaum, Learning libraries of subroutines for neurally–guided Bayesian program induction, 
in: NeurIPS, 2018.
[59] K. Yi, J. Wu, C. Gan, A. Torralba, P. Kohli, J.B. Tenenbaum, Neural-symbolic VQA: disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding, in: 
NeurIPS, 2018.
[60] J. Mao, C. Gan, P. Kohli, J.B. Tenenbaum, J. Wu, The neuro-symbolic concept learner: interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision, 
in: ICLR, 2019.
[61] K. Ellis, D. Ritchie, A. Solar-Lezama, J. Tenenbaum, Learning to infer graphics programs from hand-drawn images, in: S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, 
K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 31, Curran Associates, Inc., 2018, pp. 6059–6068.
[62] S.M. Kazemi, D. Buchman, K. Kersting, S. Natarajan, D. Poole, Relational logistic regression: the directed analog of Markov logic networks, in: Proceed-
ings of the 13th AAAI Conference on Statistical Relational AI, AAAIWS’14-13, AAAI Press, 2014, pp. 41–43.
[63] S. Dumanˇci´c, H. Blockeel, Clustering-based relational unsupervised representation learning with an explicit distributed representation, in: Proceedings 
of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-17, 2017, pp. 1631–1637.
[64] S. Dumanˇci´c, T. Guns, W. Meert, H. Blockeel, Learning relational representations with auto-encoding logic programs, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-
Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-19, 2019, pp. 6081–6087, in press.
[65] A. Cropper, Playgol: learning programs through play, in: Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 
IJCAI-19, 2019, pp. 6074–6080, in press.
[66] A. Kimmig, V.S. Costa, R. Rocha, B. Demoen, L. De Raedt, On the eﬃcient execution of problog programs, in: International Conference on Logic Pro-
gramming, Springer, 2008, pp. 175–189.
[67] J. Vlasselaer, G. Van den Broeck, A. Kimmig, W. Meert, L. De Raedt, Anytime inference in probabilistic logic programs with TP-compilation, in: Twenty-
Fourth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
34